 ﻿1 In the prior two modules we talked about the process and politics of foreign policy making in the United States. These conversations focused on the role of institutions, namely the president and congress, in making foreign policy. In this module, we finish up this section on foreign policy making by bringing in society. What do we mean by society when we are talking about foreign policy making? For our purposes, social actors include the broader public that does not hold some type of elected office in the United States. We are going to examine four ways in which the public shapes foreign policy. The first can be conceived of as the mass public as a whole. Its influence can be thought of in terms of public opinion. Simply put, in a democracy like the United States in which policy makers much rely on elections to shape policy, the level of public support they possess, or the lack thereof, has an important affect on their political effectiveness. Political opinion surveys provide a snapshot of how much support any one politician or policy possesses at a given time. The possibility of losing an election because of a disapproving electorate can pressure politicians to adopt foreign policies supported by the majority of their constituency. Second, there are economic interests, which include everything from large, multinational corporations to trade groups and unions. Third, there are special interest groups, or collections of voters that share some common set of policy interests or goals. Our main example of these groups who form policy will be the so-called Israel Lobby. However, you can think of other special interests, such as environmental groups and human rights organizations, in these terms, too. Finally, there are political and social movements, such as the Tea Party, Occupy Movement, or the Anti-war Movement during Vietnam. This module contains four lecture segments. The first defines the rally-around-the-flag effect and discusses its role in foreign policy. The second examines how variation in the effectiveness of societal groups to influence foreign policy depends on their ability to overcome something called 'The collective action problem'. The third talks about the role of economic interests in foreign policy making by introducing a concept called the open door. This refers to a long-held national interest by the United States to ensure market access in other economies around the world. The fourth segment discusses one of your assigned readings for this module on the Israel Lobby. We will provide some background on the controversies associated with this piece, offer some ways to think critically about it, and talk about how it raises larger questions about the risks associated with some groups possessing disproportionate influence over foreign policy in a democracy. 