 Let me start with a discussion of public opinion and it's effect on foreign policy. It's not difficult to find evidence of an important role for public opinion in foreign policy. During the Vietnam war, Lyndon Johnson arguably decided not to run for re-election in the 1968 presidential contest, in large part because of popular dissatisfaction with the war in Vietnam. In 2008, then-candidate Barack Obama rose to prominence in the Democratic party primary, and ultimately won election as President, in part because of his opposition to the Iraq war. Given it's importance in foreign policy it is vitally important to understand what drives the level of public support for the most important and controversial decision to send American troops into armed conflict. You have a reading for today by John Mueller called the Iraq Syndrome, that I will center this discussion around. I want to concentrate on two concepts regarding public support for military interventions. The rally around the flag phenomenon and what I am calling 'war fatigue,' these two concepts fall on opposite ends of the spectrum of popular reactions to military conflict in the United States. Now, the rally around the flag phenomenon refers to the tendency for the American public to support military campaigns, and also the presidents that launched these campaigns, when the military intervention is in it's initial stages. We have seen this phenomenon happen time and again in American history. I put on this slide the approval rating for President George W. Bush during the Iraq war. Note the spike in public support for President Bush after the attacks on 9/11, and the initiation of the conflict in Afghanistan that soon followed that attack. One might argue that the 9/11 attack was a unique historical event and I would agree however, a rally around the flag effect can also be seen under Bush in the lead up to the invasion of Iraq in 2003 fully two years after 9/11. There was a spike is support for Bush in March 2003 when the Iraq war began. Bush was sitting at around 60 percent support, or approval rating, at the beginning of 2003 and that approval rating rose to over 75 percent right after the invasion of Iraq. There are other examples as well. As your Mueller reading for today points out, both the Korean and Vietnam wars started off with very widespread support. Moreover, George H. W. Bush, President George W. Bush's father, saw is approval rating go from 64 percent to 82 percent after the start of the first Persian Gulf war in 1991. And so the point here is that time and again, at the beginning of military interventions, there is a spike in public support for the intervention itself and for the president who launches it. So there are plenty of examples of this rally around the flag effect surrounding American military interventions. But why does it happen? Let me offer a few interrelated explanations. First, nationalism can help explain this phenomenon. Citizens tend to come together in support of their country and it's leader based on their national identity in periods of military conflict as a psychological form of self defense. This happens in other countries as well. Let me offer some thoughts on other examples from my favorite country, Russia. Or at least my favorite country example. Arguably despite increasingly severe economic problems brought on by low oil prices and Western sanctions, Russian president Vladimir Putin has been helped incredibly by a surge of nationalism following his invasion of Ukraine in 2014, and his interventions militarily in Syria in 2015. Following his military intervention that led to Russia taking over the region of Crimea from Ukraine, Vladimir Putin's approval rating rose from the mid 50 percent that he was suffering from in 2011 to 83 percent after the invasion of Ukraine. And then again in the fall of 2015 after Russian military intervention in Syria President Putin's approval rating hit an all time high of 89.9 percent in October of 2015. This 90 percent popularity or approval rating for Vladimir Putin came at the same time that the Russian economy was suffering one of it's most severe crises since the late 1990s when it's currency was devalued. The Russian currency, the Ruble has lost nearly 60 percent of it's value against the dollar since 2013. And today, average Russian incomes have contracted by over 10 percent. The economy is Russia is in recession for the second straight year. All of these terrible problems are being inflicted on the average Russian. Yet, Vladimir Putin remains enormously popular. Why would that be? Well at least in part it is because Vladimir Putin has effectively harnessed national pride and nationalism through foreign military intervention. So the first explanation for the rally around the flag effect in American military interventions is the worldwide phenomenon of nationalism. Second, in addition to nationalism some argue that the public tends to ignore foreign policy and thus the typical citizen has relatively weak positions on foreign policy issues due to a lack of information This results in rather unstable policy positions that can change quickly. So public opinion on foreign policy is volatile and unstable, and that could lead to spikes in public support. This brings us to the third reason and that is the drama of military conflict If citizens hold rather weak positions on foreign policy issues, they can be more easily swayed by dramatic foreign policy crises, for example Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990, or the current crisis with ISIS in Syria and Iraq. Such traumatic events tend to significantly increase support for the country, it's president, and the military intervention that is under consideration. Now the fourth and last point is not really a reason for the rally around the flag effect but rather a pattern. The rally around the flag effect does not seem to last. The support surrounding military intervention tends to be fleeting. This might be expected since these opinions tend to be weakly rooted and swayed by contemporary events. As quickly as support spikes in the rush to invasion, it can dissipate and decline in the slog of a long war. So, let's talk a little bit about war fatigue. There is this initial spike in support for military intervention, this so called rally around the flag effect. But historically this support has not tended to last. Just as support for war tends to spike in the initial stage of the military engagement, support also tends to decline overtime. I call this tendency for public support for war to decline over time 'war fatigue' So to demonstrate war fatigue I use the exact same graphic on your slide of public support for George W. Bush during the Iraq war. Notice that just as there is a spike in support for Bush during the initial stage of the Iraq conflict, there's also a sharp decline of that same support for the war as the conflict goes on. That decline is war fatigue. The American public seems to have high enthusiasm for military engagement but also a very low tolerance for long wars. Now why would this be? In your reading today by John Mueller he gives a very straightforward answer. Americans, he argues, have very little tolerance for the casualties of American soldiers. In Mueller's words, Americans are casualty-phobic. He suggests a very simple explanation for war fatigue. As casualties mount, support decreases. It's worth noting a few aspects of this relationship as Mueller sees it. First, this is not unique to the most recent wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. It is common, it is a common historical trend that is found in all three major wars fought by the United States after World War Two. The Korean War, Vietnam War, and Iraq. Second, according to Mueller, there is very little that a president can do to prevent this trend. Presidents can give speeches, and stress how important a conflict is to American national interest, but mostly, these attempts are to no avail according to Mueller. Third and finally, Mueller argues there are long term consequences to this tendency. The American public tends to be less willing to engage in future military interventions after a long war with high casualties. So, Mueller expects an Iraq syndrome just as there was a Vietnam syndrome after that war. Indeed one might argue that President Obama's attempt to end American interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan, and his reluctance to put boots on the ground to battle threats like ISIS in Syria and Iraq, may be a manifestation of popular war fatigue in Mueller's so called "Iraq syndrome." 