 Now let's talk about lobbying society and something we call the collective action problem. So we want to talk about some of the hurdles that might limit societies effectiveness in influencing foreign policy in a democracy and note here that I say democracy. Just because people have the right to vote doesn't mean that their voices are heard equally in the policy process. We are going to identify one reason why this is the case. Now politicians tend to listen to people or groups that are loud, can gain attention in the media and thus influence the views of other people and that have access to money that can be contributed to their campaign war chests. All of these suggests that the influence of groups in the foreign policy process will rest partly on the number of like minded voters that are acting together that then pressure politicians and the financial resources that these groups can muster that might be deployed in campaigns. So one of the things we have to ask about, When is society effective? We have to look at their ability to organize and act cohesively as a group of voters. So what influences the capacity of groups to organize themselves and speak with a common voice? We can understand the effectiveness of some groups over others in convincing politicians to listen to them in terms of something called collective action. Organizing individuals to act in unison is subject to the free rider problem. Groups are more effective in acting together when they can solve this free rider problem. So what is the free rider problem? Free rider problem occurs when people don't pay the cost of producing some good or benefit yet still enjoy the benefits of consuming it. A way that you can think about the free rider problem is imagine you have 20 friends that get together that need to clean up an apartment after a party or something on Saturday morning. What's likely to happen you've got two or three people sitting on the sidelines. Maybe they're still hungover. They don't want to do any work. They're free riders and the question is how do you incentive free riders to contribute to cleaning up the apartment. And the challenge here is everyone has the incentive to free ride. If it looks like ten or twelve friends are getting the job done, then I want a free ride. I want to hang out and watch television, watch football. But the problem is if I have that incentive then everybody else has that incentive and the apartment doesn't get cleaned up. Same thing happens in politics. So let me explain what this free rider problem is in terms of an example. And a common one that's used to illustrate this in foreign policy is that of national defense. So the government needs tax revenues to pay for the military. I bet we can get fairly broad agreement that the United States needs some form of military power to at least protect us from invasion or terrorists. Because the military is so large and the number of people in the United States is so large, my individual tax contribution to the military will have a negligible effect on the quality of protection provided by the military. As a consequence, I might want to free ride on the contributions of everybody else in the United States. I get to forgo paying my taxes while still consuming military protection. Here is the problem with this situation. If it's rational for me to free ride on the tax contributions of everyone else, then it's also rational for you to free ride on the tax contributions of everyone else. This means that even when there is agreement within society that some military protection is a good thing, the good, military protection in this case. is under supplied because no one contributes to the cost of supplying it. This is why markets tend to be an imperfect institutional device to supply public goods. And it also illustrates why some form of coercive power in this example provided by the IRS is necessary to overcome that free rider problem and ensure that sufficient tax revenue will be generated to fund the military. Okay so what does all this have to do with thinking about how groups within society might influence foreign policy? Unless individuals have lots of money and here you can think of Sheldon Adelson, the casino owner in Las Vegas that's a real king maker in the Republican party, unless you have lots of money, societal influence over foreign policy has to work through the traditional channels of a democracy. In an environment of many votes, individual voters have next to zero influence on their own simply through the act of voting. Alternatively, societal groups have to mobilize lots of voters to have their voice hear in public policy debates. Politicians take notice and will support policies that might alternatively lose them large blocks of voters if they go against the wishes of those large blocks of voters. There's a related challenge here. While the act of voting is relatively cost-less, you just show up at the polls, the act of pressuring a congressional official is not. You might have to write a check for a campaign donation. You might have to engage in a letter writing campaign. You might have to take time off work to march on Washington D.C. to protest some policy like the war in Iraq. Given these costs, you can see now that collective action by voters trying to change some governmental policy might be subject to the free rider problem. So for example, in January of 2003, you might have been really opposed to president Bush's plan to go to war war in Iraq. Sure you could decide not to vote for him in 2004 but that would be unlikely to influence his electoral outcome or his policy. You could write him a letter but some intern is going to read that and then chuck it in the waste basket. You could participate in a protest movement in Washington D.C but wouldn't it be easier to hope that other people would make that long trip from Austin. I mean after all, is it really that much better to have a hundred thousand people marching in a protest over say 99,999? All of a sudden we can see how it might be easy for everyone to sit at home, complain to their colleagues at work about president Bush -- call him a warmonger and yet really do nothing that possesses the capacity to change American foreign policy. Why is this? Because these policy changes take on the attributes of a public good. A public good like national defense has two key characteristics. Once it's supplied, it's both non-excludable and non-rivalrous. Non-rivalrousness means that my consumption of the public good does not restrict your access or consumption of the public good. So in this case, because I'm larger than Rob and I take in more oxygen, my consumption - psh whatever - taller, taller, my consumption of oxygen doesn't limit his consumption of oxygen. >> [deep breath] >> [laugh] Non-excludability refers to the prohibitive costs associated with preventing someone from consuming a public good. I'm gonna get ya back don't worry. >> [laugh] Yeah, I know. >> The prohibitive cost associated with preventing someone from consuming a public good after it has been supplied. So let me give you an example of this. Let's imagine here that Professor Moser is a socialist. [laughter] >> That's hard to imagine. >> But we don't have to imagine it, because he is right? Remember the whole Russia thing, remember how excited he got this morning. >> [laughter] Russia's not a socialist country. It's not a nice country, but it's not a socialist one >> So given his love of borscht and red square, his policy views didn't really line up with those of president Bush during his counter terrorism campaign or say with president Obama today. Despite this conflict, it would be costly for president Obama to exclude Rob from consuming the benefits of his counter terror campaign. President Bush couldn't have sent a message to Bin Laden saying go ahead and take out Moser but leave everybody else alone because that would undermine the implicit commitment by president Bush and the American government to protect any and all other citizens. The same thing works with respect to Obama and his relationship with Rob today. It's costly to exclude anyone. So this difficulty in excluding Rob from consuming the public good, then tempts Rob to free-ride on the contributions of others. The same thing works with lobbying political officials to change some foreign policy. Many times important policy changes, like I said, they take on the characteristics of a public good. It's difficult for societal groups to influence foreign policy unless they have somehow solved this collective action problem. Societal groups can't do what governments do which is to simply rely on coercion. That is, the threat to throw you in jail. To force contributions to the public good. Instead, what societal groups have to do is rely on something called selective incentives. They offer extra goodies to you if you join their organization that can only be consumed if you contribute to the public good. Think of the AARP in these terms. All their senior citizens get magazines and frequent discounts on hotels, rental cars, and meals because of that membership card. These selective incentives then encourage senior citizens to write that check to the AARP. Which then uses some of their funds, some of those resources to fund campaigns and higher lobbying firms to ensure that Congress doesn't touch Social Security. In your reading today, you have think of APAC as an organization that has transcended these challenges associated with collective action and is now a very effective organization in influencing American foreign policy. Too effective according to Mearsheimer and Walt, something that we're gonna get to towards the tail part of class. So now let me illustrate these dynamics with one final example from trade policy. It starts with a puzzle. If we have lots of evidence that international trade increases the national income or the wealth of an economy then why do governments enact things like tarifs or taxes on traded goods that limit this trade? We can understand these decisions partly because one of the chief beneficiaries of international trade namely consumers, face this collective action problem in lobbying the government to enact a free trade policy. We can think of these consumer benefits from free trade in terms of the Wal*Mart effect. Wal*Mart's business model has relied heavily on pushing it's suppliers to cut their own costs of production which often meant moving factories offshore to China in the 1990s to take advantage of cheap labor costs there. So if you shop at Wal*Mart, you benefit from greater trade with China because you can now get your t-shirts cheaper. And even if you don't show at Wal*Mart, say you shop at Target instead, you still benefit because Target has to push prices down to remain competitive with Wal*Mart. Now the big question is the following - does saving 25 or 30 bucks a year on cheaper t-shirts or underwear, is that a sufficient benefit for you to lobby your congressional official to cut tariffs on textiles that are imported from China even lower? Probably not. Instead, you hope somebody else will do the work like writing a campaign check, or organizing some free-trade demonstration in DC so you can free ride. Remember the problem here. If you think it might be a good idea to free ride, then so does everybody else that is buying t-shirts and underwear this year. As a group then, consumers or society as a whole, tend to be really ineffective advocates for free trade because of this collective action problem. Alternatively, the groups that pay the costs of free trade in terms of lost jobs and think here the people that in textile factories in United States say in South Carolina, tend to be much better advocates for trade restrictions. Why? Because they're losses are large and they're concentrated in smaller groups. The textile industry is big in a few southern states which means that their workers votes are concentrated there. Textile firms have formed producer associations to solve the collective action problem. They can monitor the contributions of each other to lobbying groups that then pressure politicians to preserve tariffs on textiles. In sum, we can partially understand why society is incapable of securing a trade policy that would benefit large portions of it through the logic of the collective action problem. Even though they have lots of votes, consumers can't solve their collective action problem on their own. 