 Let's continue with this theme of how economic interest within society might influence foreign policy. And I want to introduce you to one prominent line of historical arguments that have been used to try to understand America's emergence as a global power at the turn of the 20th century and it's subsequent territorial expansion outside of the continent in terms of something called the open door. So we go to the new slide and check out - this is one of my favorite slides - we got president Business as our linchpin >> from the lego movie >> yes, as our linchpin of America as an imperial power. So the broad claim here is that economic interests, in particular the need to secure consumer markets outside of the United States and cheap raw materials have played a large role in the global projection of American power and influence The slide shown here raises a big question Is the United States an empire? And it offers a number of examples of American territorial expansion in the last 125 years or so. These arguments also posses and underlying political claim that is often labeled as state capture theory. The idea here is that large corporations, in LEGO speak, Lord Business, posses disproportionate influence over American foreign policy the global interests of their firms become the political interests of the US government. So for example, in the early 1990s when it looked at though the Mexican government and Mexican firms were going to default on a series of loans obtained from Wall Street, what happens is the Treasury Department lends money to the Mexican government to ensure that these loans can be repaid so these Wall Street banks don't go out of business. In this a controversial policy relative to Mexico and incidentally Congress opposed this, and so the Treasury Department had to tap it's own source of funds. This controversial policy in which Congress is bypassed, was adopted arguably to protect American banks. The broad idea here is that the US government has long been an advocate for something called the open door. Even though it has a long history of shutting off foreign access to the American consumer market, really from the time of independence until the end of World War II, the United States has long championed equal access for everybody else in foreign markets. Given a large internal market that was fairly protective, American firms tended to be very competitive in international markets they just needed equal access. So at the turn of the 20th century, this was one of the ways in which the United States challenged the imperial positions of European powers in Africa, Latin America, and Asia. Imperial possessions like Canada or India in the case of Great Britain, often granted preferential economic access to their firms from the home economy. So for example, raw materials could be imported free into the home country say from Canada to the UK. Because this disadvantaged American firms, the US government became an advocate for the open door basically arguing everybody else needs to give US firms access to their markets even though we're not doing the same thing for you. This school of thought argues that the depression, this is the earlier depression from the 1870s into the early 1890s really helped activate business interest in the United States to form them into a cohesive group into supporting a more active foreign policy. The depression had been marked by significant deflation or falling prices. Business interests thought that these falling prices which were pushing their revenues down were caused by overproduction. Capitalism had simply become too efficient in the United States. They believed then that the only way to save the system was to export their way back to growth. Use foreign markets to relieve excess supply of industrial or agricultural products at home. However, because the United States was a little late to the game of securing empires around the world, it couldn't gain this market access without enlisting military power and territorial expansion in support of these economic interests. And this meant constructing a modern navy. The point of all this is that there's a prominent line of thinking about American foreign policy that explains its development over the last 125 years or so in terms of the economic interests of the producer or capital-holding class in the United States. These studies have examined American expansion in the 1890s, the decision to go to war in 1917, the terms of the postwar order constructed in Europe after World War II, and American interventions in Latin America during the Cold War. You can also think about the first Persian Gulf War in these terms. Because president George H.W. Bush was very transparent in his concerns that Iraq's control over the oil of both Saudi Arabia and Kuwait could wreak havoc on the American Economy. 