 All right. >> So I'm up next? >> Yeah. >> All right, so now we're gonna switch gears. We're gonna turn to our readings for today. I'm just gonna keep going on that. And we're gonna talk about the Mearsheimer, Walt reading. But before we do that, we wanna set up this conversation by returning to one of the big questions that organizes the content in this course, namely, what are America's foreign policy interests? You can think of interests as the broad goals that orient American foreign policy. For example, should it promote democracy? Should it be focused on countering a few key adversaries in the international system? Should it be oriented or designed around the open door, namely efforts to secure equal access for American firms in foreign markets? Or should American foreign policy instead be oriented around maintaining or enhancing existing alliance relationships? The Mearsheimer and Walt reading is oriented around this larger question. It explicitly criticizes the drift in American foreign policy, that they argue, seems to be aligning de facto foreign policy interest of the United States with those of Israel. Akin to the open door approach, which argues the business interests capture the government so that it pursues foreign policy interests that are consistent with those big economic firms. Mearsheimer and Walt argued that the small but effective group of Americans, organized through AIPAC, play an outsized role in American foreign policy discussions and have pushed the US government too close to Israel. Now before Rob and I talk about this article some, I wanna give you a little background on it. It was obviously immensely controversial. You can go onto their webpages and see huge amounts of critiques that it generated, many of which that they then responded to. You can see some of these exchanges on the London Review of Books Website. I think there's another 25 pages of letters posted after the original article. Some of these criticisms included charges of Antisemitism leveled against Mearsheimer and Walt. >> Can I interject in this? This is a very controversial reading in that one thing that I want you all, if you get really upset after reading this, or really excited because you agree, is that from our perspective this is the type of reading that students in a US foreign policy course should read. It's controversial, it makes you think about things. You might not agree with it, but then you're forced to address an argument that has been out there for a very long time. And the other thing I want you to think about and do when you read this, is don't skip the letters at the end. There's a bunch of comments after the end of the article that level, and we'll talk about these critiques of the argument in lecture today a little bit later. But read the whole thing and the comments so that you get both sides of the argument itself, plus the critiques. >> All right, so theoretically these authors are realists. They believe that national interest should be first determined by threats emanating from the international system. It is the job of national leaders to define those threats and then push, nudge, or convince the voters of these imperatives when confronted with them. Realism is a really a top down model of how grand strategy should be designed and executed. Thus, the growing influence of the lobby contrasts sharply with their ideal of foreign policy decision making. They are worried that the cost of this special relationship with Israel are outweighing its benefits and heightening the challenges associated with conducting an effective policy in the Middle East. For example, in another piece authored by Mearsheimer and Walt in the run up to the war against Iraq in 2003, they argued that there was no need to go to war against Saddam Hussein. Instead, they argued that he had been effectively contained through the no-fly zone and sanctions implemented in the aftermath of the first Persian Gulf War. They anticipated many of the problems that would follow such an invasion. These arguments about Iraq are then connected to their arguments about the Israel lobby. Why did the United States go to war in Iraq if it wasn't in it's national interest? They claim here that America's ties with Israel played a significant role in the decision to attack Iraq, which they argue violated America's long-term interest. >> All right, so let's break down this article a bit. What is the Mearsheimer, Walt argument regarding the Israel lobby? There are a lot of facets to their argument. A lot of examples, a lot of specific points. But I want to try to get the broad argument down, and it can be basically boiled down to two parts. First, They argue that the close ties that have developed between the United States and Israel. And subsequent American actions to pursue policies closely aligned with those of the Israeli government's, are not in the strategic interest of the United States. And so they see a disjuncture between American interests and Israeli interests that is driving US policy to be counteractive toward its own interests. The second part of their argument, then, is to try to explain why the United States is pursuing a policy that's not in their strategic self-interest. And to understand why the US would pursue a pro-Israeli policy that runs against it's interests, Mearsheimer and Walt argue that you must look at domestic politics and the influence of the pro-Israel lobby groups in the United States. So that's the two components of this argument. So let's break down these two components of the argument into further parts, right? On the first half of Mearsheimer and Walt's argument, the author's take on several common arguments that have been used to buttress the fact that the United States has maintained a close relationship with Israel. So they sort of confront, well, why does the United States have this close relationship? And most people give this series of reasons. And they say that they contend that these reasons are not very good ones, right? They confront, and are you against it? So what are the common arguments? First, there's the argument that Israel is a vital strategic interest for the United States within a very volatile region in the Middle East. And Mearsheimer and Walt challenged this idea that Israel is a vital strategic interest for the US in the region. And they provide numerous examples of how support for Israel actually runs counter to US strategic interests in the United States. And so let me give you a few of those specific instances. First, they claim that supporting Israel is costly in the Middle East because it complicates relations with the US Arab allies. And so support for example, support for Israel they argue was one factor in OPEC's oil embargo, back in the 1970s, that substantially harmed American economic interest then. And they give a lot of examples about how the relationship between Israel and the United States has very much complicated the execution of the Persian Gulf War, because it alienated America's Arab allies. Secondly, they challenged the idea that the US and Israel have common enemies, which would then produce strategic interests. Instead, they argue that Israel's adversaries, including terrorists groups like Hamas actually aren't much of a threat to the United States. And they only become a threat because the US is so strongly aligned with Israeli interests. So the common enemy approach that we have to stick together because we're facing a common a set of common adversaries, for Mearsheimer and Walt, they said that's not the case. Third, they take on this argument that Israel is a very small country surrounded by a bunch of enemies. And you should sort of stick up for the underdog here. And they argue in very explicit terms that Israel really just isn't an underdog in the Middle East. It has the strongest military, it has nuclear weapons. It doesn't need Americas help in defending itself. They also argue, and I think I got off of order here, but they also argue that support for Israel has been one of the sources for anti-American sentiment in the Middle East. And so that this makes for a harder strategic climate because of that support. Another reason that is often claimed for supporting Israel, is that it's a loyal ally, but what Mearsheimer and Walt argue is that oftentimes Israel does not act as a loyal ally. Instead, Israel often defies American requests and advice on issues like building settlements, even though it gets enormous amounts of American foreign aid. And finally, they take on this argument that support for Israel and it's relationship to the attack on Iraq in the early 2000s. And they argued that the Untied States attacked Iraq, primarily, or at least one of the main reasons for attacking Iraq was not oil, it wasn't weapons of mass destruction, but rather it was support for Israel and its security. And that, for them, this was a huge example of how the United States was was acting against its own self-interest because it was so closely aligned with Israel national interests. So, all of these put together you see that their first point is that Israel as a vital strategic interest really isn't a very good reason for the United States to support Israel. Second, they challenge the idea that the US has to defend Israel. This is the point I made earlier. That the United States has to defend Israel because it's surrounded by enemies that are trying to destroy it. And they argue that, really, Israel is strong enough to defend itself. That it has the strongest military in the region. It has nuclear weapons. It doesn't need US protection. And third, they also challenge the idea that the US should support Israel because it's a fellow democracy, which is a common argument made. They argue that Israel's regime type, it's democratic status, is just not a good reason to support any country. That the US regularly allies itself with dictatorships. It regularly distances itself from democracies if those actions are in the strategic interests of the United States. And so, regime type isn't for Mearsheimer and Walt, as realists, a very good reason for some sort of close alliance. You always have to stick to the strategic interests in play. Fourth, they challenge then the common moral arguments for supporting Israel. And this is centered around past persecution of Jews all around the world, particularly in the West. And they claim that although this was a good reason for support of the establishment of Israel, that it's not a very good reason for current support of Israel. Again, because we need to not concentrate on strategic interests. >> All right, before I continue this conversation, I just wanna point out that the PDFs that we had posted the links to these readings, and a PDF on Canvas. The PDF that we had posted didn't have the letters and responses to the Mearsheimer and Walt. We've got a new link posted up now that has all those responses from the London Review of Books main website. So if you want to look at those responses, please do. You can find the link on canvas. Okay, so the second half of their argument claims that since the reasons for the United States' strong support of Israel is not driven by strategic or moral interests, it's best explained by domestic politics. Namely, the influence of the powerful pro-Israel lobby groups within the United States. So, according to Mearsheimer and Walt's, how does the Israel lobby so strongly influence US foreign policy? Well, first one has to analyze their definition of the Israel lobby. It's not one group, but a network of many. For the Authors, The Israel Lobby is quote, shorthand for the loose coalition of individuals and organizations who actively work to steer US foreign policy in a pro-Israel direction, unquote. Despite being just one of a whole large chunk of groups the main organization within the Israel Lobby is the American-Israel Public Affairs Committee or AIPAC. Mearsheimer and Walt make a few specific observations about this lobby organization. First it is perceived as one of the most powerful lobby groups in Washington, usually ranking only behind the AARP and ahead of the National Rifle Association, which is saying something. Second, and this should be highlighted, the authors do not view AIPAC has somehow unique among special interest groups or engaging in unusual or illicit activities. To quote them, they are quote, only doing what other special interest groups do, but they're just doing it very much, a lot better, unquote. So in one sense the activities of AIPAC are business as usual for American-style democracy. Special interest groups lobby politicians and lobby the government all the time. AIPAC is just extremely effective at it. Third, the authors go into great detail and provide many examples of the lobbying activities of AIPAC and other pro-Israel lobby groups. However, these activities cannot be broken down into two primary activities. Pro-Israel groups like AIPAC lobby policy makers through campaign donations, letter-writing campaigns, and providing information. They also try to shape public discourse by influencing the media and other public opinion makers. >> All right, so let me make one final point about this reading. So you've got the argument that there is a disjuncture between US-Israeli politics but the United States still follows its very closely aligned foreign policy in the Middle East that is in support of Israel. And then they say, they question why that would be in the, they have a domestic politics answer, that these special interest groups, the pro-Israel lobby is what's driving this. As a final point, I wanted to talk a bit about some of the main critiques of Mearsheimer and Walt's argument. As we said at the beginning of this discussion, and now that we've got the right version posted. This piece has been very controversial and has received a lot of criticism. And we purposefully assigned the reading and the subsequent responses and critiques so you can see both parts of this debate the original argument and some of the main criticisms. So don't skip the letters at the end. Now what are the main criticisms? Now there are a lot of them and some of them get kind of very specific so let me kind of characterize four general categories of critiques. Mearsheimer and Walt first, according to the critiques, exaggerate the influence of the pro-Israel lobby groups. The idea that the United States is somehow pursuing a foreign policy that it would not otherwise pursue, primarily, are only because they get pressure from AIPAC. For a lot of critics it's just way more credit or blame to give this domestic pressure group than it deserves. And if you Google Israel lobby and the Iran Nuclear Deal you'll see that there has been kind of a debate about their waning influence of the Israel Lobby in that particular policy decision. And so, there's a lot of talk about how strong really is the pro-Israel lobby groups in that you can kinda demonize, if you will, these lobby groups by exaggerating their strength and that's one of the criticisms. Secondly Mearsheimer and Walt, the critics argue, exaggerate the role of Israel in US Middle East policy. That they say, to say that the United States does everything because of Israel simply ignores a array of other factors, from oil to terrorist threats to other allies like Saudi Arabia and the like to religious conflict and turmoil that play into American foreign policy. To center and fixate on simply US foreign policy in Iraq and everywhere else is driven by the United States relationship with Israel is just too one-sided and too narrow of a perspective. The third main critique is that and this one is quite strongly held by some is that Mearsheimer and Walt simply blame Israel for too much. And they're too critical of Israel in all aspects of it, from it's the quality of its democracy to it being the source of anti-Americanism in the region, to its foreign policy towards other states. You can't simply blame Israel for everything that's gone wrong in the Middle East the critics say. And then finally there is more specifics arguments about the particulars of Mearsheimer and Walt's case. That they simply represent activities of the pro Israel groups inaccurately at times. And you'll see some evidence of that as well. >> So we thought we would open up just a quick chat to, and we simply if you guys would give us one or two sentence responses to the reading. What do you think? Do you agree, you disagree? Why or why not? Just a sentence or two. We'll talk about those in a little bit. But I wanna kinda jump on here and think about this argument more broadly. And so, obviously it generates lots of controversy. One of the reasons we assign this is to generate practice for you in how to think critically and break down an argument. And so one of the things that I wanna do here is let's step back to where we began the conversation, which is what are their theoretical predispositions and think about those. Remember I said they're nested in realism. Their model of how foreign policy or American grand strategy should be constructed is one in which a series, the President, the Executive Branch, maybe some of Congress, they sit down, they define the national interest of the United States in foreign policy terms relative to how they see threats around the world. And then they convince the American public to execute this. And that's a top down approach to foreign policy. So it's that theoretical disposition that then helps to create foundations for this criticism. And one way that I respond to this is that this is a democracy. When you're talking about sustaining American military intervention, defining American foreign policy interest, defining what's moral or ethical in American foreign policy, the influence of domestic politics is impossible to separate from. Moreover, you don't want to separate yourself from domestic politics because you cannot get out in front of the public if you want to be able to execute a policy in the long run. One way to push back on this is what's the alternative? >> What's the remedy? >> Yeah. This is the way Democratic politics, and also there's another argument for this. And think about this with respect to the collective action policy, or the collective action dynamics that you watched in the pre-class modules. You have a concentrated group that really cares about this issue. The rest, I mean groups that don't necessarily care all that much about it, is it all that bad that they're left out of the policy making process? They have the same level of mechanisms and influence to participate in this process and it could be that their inactivity simply reflects either disinterestedness or passive agreement with the policy. >> Acquiescence. >> Yeah. >> I would say that the thing to note, and this is why we highlight it in the lecture here, is that Mearsheimer and Walt are not, they explicitly state that the pro-Israel lobby is just like any other lobby, it just does it really well. And that is a really crucial part of this whole argument because it then allows one to say okay, then what, are you gonna outlaw pressure groups? How would you do that? And it means that there are other pressure groups in foreign policy, besides the Israel lobby. There's economic pressure groups, there's other ethnic pressure groups. What about the lobby in south Florida around policies over Cuba? I mean you can point to a lot of these types of groups. Try to broaden this debate outside of the particular case, because the bigger point is about democracy and foreign policy and the like. >> Another way to think about this as well, it's easy for politicians to criticize, everyone says special interest, I'm not going to captivated or captured by the special interest, guess what? Special interests are the way American government works and it's not just a story. I mean, the critique is often one nested about perverting the democratic process, giving groups disproportionate influence over the making of policy. There's another component of this, that it's about government efficiency. The government relies on these special interest groups, arguably experts, to provide information about what is the best policy, and so there's a critical component here as well that gets lost in these conversations. We want specialists, groups that really care about the interests. You want to be able to rely on them to give you advice on policy, as well, and that's often left out of these claims, as well. >> Also, what interest groups do is it organizes society for government to negotiate with. If you didn't have interest groups, how would the United States government respond to amorphous opinion on any issue without some sort of organized group that will gather evidence and information and organize people to make proposals and the like? 