 ﻿1 The last topic introduced the concept of grand strategy and talked about it as a way of organizing different positions in the spectrum of various foreign policies that the United States might pursue. Grand strategies are a way of clumping foreign policy ideas together in the same way that partisanship or the Democratic and Republican labels are a way to clump together various domestic policy positions. For example, in domestic politics, when you hear a proposal for tax cuts, you tend to identify that with the Republican Party. In grand strategy debates, when you hear policies designed to strengthen multi-lateral, international organizations, like the United Nations, as we saw in Obama's West Point speech, we tend to think of liberal internationalism - a grand strategy we will be discussing today. We also discussed the Obama Doctrine as a means to illustrate some of the dimensions of grand strategy. And then we introduced one variant of this larger debate about grand strategy, that of isolationism. In this group of lecture segments, we are going to continue our discussion of the varieties of grand strategy by examining selective engagement, which we will sometimes refer to as offshore balancing. We will discuss liberal internationalism and primacy. There are five additional lecture segments for this topic. The first defines selective engagement and discusses the presidencies of Eisenhower and George H.W.Bush as historical examples of selective engagement. The second lecture segment defines liberal internationalism and points to the policies of Woodrow Wilson as reflecting this grand strategy. The third utilizes liberal internationalism to review the foreign policies of President Obama and extend the discussion of his West Point speech. The fourth defines the grand strategy of primacy and briefly introduces the policies of George W. Bush as an example of it. It also examines the relationship between neoconservatism and primacy. And the fifth lecture segment provides a discussion of the debate found in the two readings that were assigned for this module. It compares the pullback reading by Barry Posen with the article titled 'Lean Forward' by Brooks, Ikenberry and Wohlforth. As a brief introduction to this conversation, we should note that Posen argues that the four grand strategy positions that we identify here in lecture have been collapsed into two in recent foreign policy debates in the United States. He argues that isolationism and offshore balancing, or selective engagement, those positions have been fused into something that he advocates and calls "restraint." And he also argues that the positions of liberal internationalism and primacy have been fused into something that he labels "liberal hegemony". On a broad level, Posen argues that the United States needs to withdraw from some of its global commitments while Brooks and his coauthors argue that these commitments should be maintained. Again, make sure you can summarize these arguments in a few sentences, and be sure that you can identify the issues on which they disagree. In sum, you should think about this module as being organized around the following questions: what is selective engagement? What are some historical examples of selective engagement? What is liberal internationalism? And what are some historical examples of liberal internationalism? What is primacy? How is primacy related to neoconservatism? And what are some historical examples of primacy? What are the principal lines of disagreement in the assigned readings for this topic? 