 Selective engagement. Selective engagement, it's also called offshore balancing just so that you might get confused, I guess? No, it's in the readings that way. And it shares certain key elements with isolationism, in that it is quite mindful of the limits of American power. And in fact, in your reading from last time by Halgrin he suggests that selective engagement can sometimes be mistakenly be characterized or even criticized as isolationism. And so it's very crucial to note, and this is an important aspect of just the grand strategies, all right, in general. And that is that, they lie on the spectrum and, and they are differentiated, but they have a certain similarities or overlap as well. So the selective engagement is distinct from isolationism, even though both are mindful of more constrained, or, or advocate a more constrained foreign policy. And here are the two key differences between them, and the logic underlying selective engagement versus isolationism. Those advocating selective engagement, they acknowledge and even embrace America's global position as a super power. Even though they talk about the limitations on American power, they are much more comfortable with an or eager to embrace the role of the United States as a global superpower that has global interests. And so, rather than the narrower interests that are associated with isolationism, the selective engagement does have a sense that the threats against American power global, and that the United States has global interests. And those advocating selective engagement are also more comfortable, this is the second difference with isolationism. More comfortable with diplomacy. And the give and take of balance of power politics. And the need for credible commitments between friendly countries against their common enemies. Thus, while the isolationist might not like long-standing American commitments to NATO or Japan, someone advocating strategic engagement would see these as central offshore balancing techniques that would be central to the overall plan for American foreign policy. Now, as a quick sidebar, we would like to quickly define what we mean by balancing behavior. This refers to foreign policy efforts to prevent the concentration of power, defined to include political, military, and economic power, in any one state or aligned group of states. So balancing is trying to counter the concentration of power. This con, any concentration of power in other countries is threatening to American interests because this concentration could match or exceed American power. Consequently, balancing efforts by the United States refer to it's efforts to block the growth of power of other states in the international system. For example, containment, during the Cold War, was a grand strategy designed to contain or prevent the expansion of Soviet power and influence outside of its borders. The overriding interest of selective engagement is, focus first on the prevention of great power war. And so, the chief goal or the chief problem that selective engagement wants to solve is these on great power wars. These large wars directly impinge on American interests. They often necessitate significant domestic changes such as, during World War II, there were significant domestic changes to engage in that global war. And they are very costly. And so a great power war is a war that involves the largest and strongest states in the system. Consequently, this strategy of strategic balancing is generally focused on great power relations. It strives to preserve a stable balance of power among the great powers. Over the last 70 years, this has meant taking actions to ensure that no great power dominated the Eurasian continent, Europe and, and Asia. This also means that selective engagers are hesitant to intervene in local conflicts between smaller parties, unless, unless those local conflicts threaten to expand to include great powers like in the case of World War I. So, Pat, you'll move on to some historical examples. >> Well, I want to give a few examples of what is selective engagement, would look like and look at a couple of administrations. So first let's talk about President Eisenhower. President Eisenhower sought to alter the nature of Americas com, military commitment to Europe in the 1950s. He was trying to pressure Europe to assume more of the responsibility for their own defense relative to the Soviet Union so that he could make the long conflict with the Soviet Union more sustainable domestically at home. He was not overriding the broader policy of containment. Instead, he sought to preserve peace among the great powers and the political status quo in Europe by relying more on nuclear weapons to deter the Soviet Union. So, pull back American troops from western Europe. What, and this differs from the Truman administration, but then increase America's reliance on the nuclear deterrent. Eisenhower was unwilling to commit the same level of resources to Europe as Truman did. He even went so far as to advocate the transfer of nuclear weapons to West Germany. And it's this attempt to pull back from an extensive commitment, in terms of conventional forces in Europe, where Eisenhower takes on some of the attributes of an offshore balancer or someone who supports selective engagement. He was, wanted to rely on Americas traditional allies to counter the Soviet threat. But he also wanted to make sure that the Europeans were shouldering their proportion of the costs of responding to the potential Soviet threat. Moreover, Eisenhower saw this increasing nuclearization of American policy as a way to prevent the resurgence of isolationism in the United States. Eisenhower worried that the growing economic costs of the Cold War would activate staunch domestic resistance to containment. So, if, if we, if the US has to run a long arms race with the Soviet Union, put troops in Western Europe, you got to pay for things. You got to raise taxes, you got to divert resources from consumption in the domestic economy. Eisenhower worries that this is gonna create a domestic backlash against containment, and help the isolationists at home. And he didn't want to do that, because it, he felt that if American Presidents conceded to isolationists, and then withdrew completely from American commitments to Europe. It would cause a shift in the balance of power in Europe, and potentially create a crisis in which the Soviet Union would try to step into an emerging political vacuum. So under these circumstances, Eisenhower is worried that he would then have to go back into Europe, and go back to war, to reestablish the political status quo in Europe. So it's, I've gotta beat back the isolationists at home, is what Eisenhower is thinking in 52 and 53. I gotta make the cold war sustainable. That means, I've gotta reduce the costs at home. And I'm gonna do that by increasing American reliance on nuclear weapons. All right, so the second president I want to talk about is the policies that are implemented under President George H.W Bush, that are really critical in managing the dissolution of the Soviet Union over the period from 89 to 91, in a peaceful matter. And we could see kind of similarities between Bush and Eisenhower. President Bush was very cautious with respect to the collapse of Soviet influence in Eastern Europe in 1989 and 1990. He resisted calls at home from within his own administration and within his own party, to seize on Gorbachev's weakness. By the time Gorbachev's deteriorating domestic position became apparent, Bush instead sought to try and bolster Gorbachev, domestically through diplomacy, through cautious diplomacy. Bush also worked through the traditional alliance network of NATO, to manage the unification of Germany in 1990. So German Unification creates huge political problems at home for Gorbachev, because the Soviet Union had waged the Cold War in large part to keep Germany divided and weak, so it couldn't invade the Soviet Union again as it had done in 1941. So Bush has gotta reassure Gorbachev that if we allow Germany to reunify in 1990, that Germany isn't going to create a long term security problem for the Soviet Union say 20 years from now. So what Bush did was rely on NATO and make commitments within NATO arguing that we can rely on NATO in the future to enable the United States and the, and the United Kingdom to constrain German foreign policy in a way that it doesn't become threatening to the Soviet Union. So what we see at the end of the Cold War is President Bush. Using traditional diplomacy, understanding Gorbachev's concerns, co, and concern about the long run probability, or potential for war and actually taking efforts to strengthen Gorbachev, so he had a stable partner in great power politics. So, in short Bush was in many ways a classical realist that's sought to stabilize great power relations and preserve peace in a period of rapid change by relying on traditional alliance structures. And I think it's fair to say that this, this really was a remarkable achievement, cuz if you go back to the mid, early to mid 1980's, nobody predicts that you could have an end to the cold war in a peaceful fashion in the exact way that it did. >> Yeah. And, let me just- >> Sure. >> Add a few things here. We'll talk more about the end of the Cold War and some of the debates surrounding American foreign policies contribution to the end of the Cold War. And a lot of the tension gets placed on President Regan, and his foreign policy and, and much less, and I'd say kinda mistakenly so to George H.W. Bush's foreign policy on this. Because he did have a very tricky situation in trying to manage what was clearly kind of becoming an inevitable decline and collapse of the Soviet Union. And there was, I'll mention one thing, There was this rather infamous speech he gave in Kiev, Ukraine, right at the time when the Soviet Union was really pulling apart. In which he tried to, to convey this cautious approach and told the audience in Kiev, which was not really receptive to this message, to sort of, you know, slow down and not put so much pressure on Gorbachev and the Soviet split, to to be more cautious. And really what came under great criticism here and abroad, and it became known as the chicken Kiev speech, that he was faulted on. But, you know, in retrospect as the whole thing unfolded and very peacefully this sort of approach was quite successful in its main goal, so. >> So, I think we can also reinforce this image of Bush as an offshore balancer by comparing his policies of prudence with the Clinton administration. >> Right. >> Which goes ahead and expands N.A.T.O. into former Warsaw Pact Countries. And N.A.T.O. North American Treaty Organization, this is a big miliary alliance between the United States and countries in Europe designed to counter Soviet influence during the Cold War. So Clinton go ahead, goes ahead in the 1990's and expands N.A.T.O. to include countries in Eastern Europe that had formerly been part of the Warsaw Pact. And it's those policies which you might link with either liberal internationalism or even primacy. This is about expanding American influence into Eastern Europe that play an important role in the deterioration of US and Russian relations today. This is something that Putin comes back to again and again. That when, Russia was weak, Clinton in a sense- >> Right. >> Put the boot on the throat. >> Right, and that, that has been the source of a lot of the contemporary, I mean quite current hostilities right now over Ukraine, and Russian aggression towards it's neighbors. >> As a final side bar, if you go back and look at the foreign policies, Bush's son, President George W Bush, when he was a presidential candidate, they were very much like his father's. So, Condoleezza Rice writes the famous policy statement in foreign affairs for candidate Bush in the summer of 2000. It was subsequently criticized for its focus on traditional great power, power concerns, like China and Russia and is neglective terrorism. Bush was an off shore balancer before 9/11 and then 9/11 creates this significant change in, in his foreign policy. >> Candidate George W Bush. >> Yes, yeah in his, in his grand strategy orientation 