 Let's move on to a discussion of our two remaining grand strategies, liberal internationalism and primacy. Starting with the discussion of liberal internationalism. Liberal internationalism is a foreign policy grand strategy that has several key features that differentiate it from the other competing grand strategies. First, it's main objective is to achieve security for the United States by using multilateral - multilateral means to create a liberal international order. Before moving on to specific elements of this grand strategy, we must first define  key term liberal. In this context, liberal does not have the same connotation that this term has in the Partisan politics within the United States. To be liberal, in the United States, is often assumed to support, so called progressive, issues particularly regarding equality for disenfranchised social groups. However, when we speak of liberal internationalism or a liberal international order in international relations, we mean liberal in the classic sense prevalent in European politics. In which liberal means an emphasis on free and fair elections, individual rights and freedoms like freedom of speech, religion, assembly and the press, civil rights and equality, and private property in a free market economy. These are ideas that both, so called Conservatives and the Liberals within the US support. The philosophy had its roots in the seventeenth century with thinkers such as John Locke and was a reaction against authoritarian monarchies and futile social systems based on hereditary privilege. This is important to remember. Both the Democrats and Republicans in the United States are liberal. In the classic European sense. And so, find your most conservative Republican today, and call him a liberal. And then, explain this whole thing to him, or her. Thus, liberal internationalism is a grand strategy that strives to create an international system dominated by Democratic pallidies and a global, free market system that prioritizes values inherent in the American domestic political system, individual rights and freedoms, and liberty, both political liberty and economic liberty. Like other grand strategies, except isolationism, liberal internationalism sees American national interest and its major security threats as global in nature and expansive, rather than narrow. Now, there are two features that differentiate liberal internationalism from other grand strategies that are oriented toward global engagement. And so as you'll see, there's isolationism as we depict it with more narrow depictions of American interest, and then there's this catago, this set of grand strategies from selective engagement. Liberal internationalism and primacy that all see the threats of the United States and the national interests of the United States as global, so you have to differentiate that, those groups. The two things that differentiate liberal internationalism from selective engagement or primacy are first, liberal internationalism sees security as collective in nature rather than achieved solely by the in, the efforts of one state, or a state by itself. Thus, liberal internationalists, excuse me, emphasize multilateral over unilateral means. And see great value in international organizations like the United Nations and alliances like NATO. The United States, according to liberal internationalists, should hardly ever go it alone, and should always strive to work with partners and allies when combating threats. Second, liberal internationalism emphasizes values, notably liberal values like democracy, human rights and free trade, more than the other grand strategies. Security is seen as contextual, a world full of democracies and managed through international organizations based on American. Inspired values, like protection of human rights would not only be a better world, but would also be a safer and more secure one for the United States from the perspective of liberal internationalist. President Obama, in his speech to the West Point cadets, assigned in this class, makes exactly this point. There shouldn't be a choice between values and security. They should reinforce each other. By emphasizing multilateralism and values, liberal internationalism is often seen as in the vain of idealism as oppose to realism, as a grand strategy. However, one thing that should be noted is that liberal internationalism often calls for extensive American military and economic intervention in countries around the world. And so, it's often an activist foreign policy that can entail quite a bit if projection of American power and even quite a bit of military conflict. And so, this is a grand strategy that often sees the United States engaged in variety of conflicts in a variety of areas around the world. And so, it's precisely this activist tendency that is the strongest critique against liberal internationalism. Critics of this grand strategy sometimes perceive liberal internationalism as a form of liberal imperialism. And so Pat, you have something historical. >> Yes, so let's talk about one example of this. And these are the policies pursued by Woodrow Wilson after 1917. And these are often pointed to as an exemplar of liberal internationalism. First, it's important to note that he is willing to use both military force and international institutions to champion American foreign policy goals. He's motivated by a large ambition to transform the world, essentially rooting out traditional European competition. Particularly over empires to set up a series of international institutions, chief among them was the League of Nations, that could eliminate the problem of war. So he champions this thing called the League of Nations, a voluntary he envisioned as, and this is part of where the controversy was, he envisioned it as a voluntary collective security organization that would be designed to deter. Future attempts to alter the territorial status quo around the world, say in Europe or in empires in Africa or in, in Asia. Revisionist states would face the risk of provoking, and when I say revisionist, states that are dissatisfied with the existing political order of the world to try to remake it with military force. And you could think about Hitler in these terms. Wilson's idea though was that revisionist states, these challengers, would face the risk of provoking an overwhelming coalition against them. States would then be pressured to handle all disputes, or he hoped, anyway, that states would be pressured to handle all disputes through things like international arbitration rather than war. So, if the potential of facing this overwhelming counter-coalition. Wilson hoped that aggressors would be deterred from pursuing such strategies, to remake the system that had been created in 1919. We can also see Wilson's support for traditional liberal goals, like democracy, liberal in a European sense. Like democracy in national self determination. These two things were often conflated in Wilson's own speeches and writing. But is important to note a distinction. First, national self-determination focused on empowering peoples, living under imperial rule to determine their own political fate. This meant being able to declare political independence safe from the British Empire. Apart from his strong moral belief in the legitimacy of free will and empowerment, with respect to political organization, Wilson also sought to undermine traditional European empires. And this goal directly challenged them by fostering local resistance and making them, making empires harder to administer for the distant European powers. It's clear that local independence movements around the world were keying off, Wilson's public statements repeatedly from about 1915 on. In Wilson's famous 14 point speech which. Outlines his vision for the world, after the defeat of Germany. You can also see Wilson's support for, for other traditional liberal policies, democracy, free trade. He calls for the open navigation of the seas. Which was designed to facilitate greater international com, commerce. And like self determination. It directly challenged the foundations of European empires. Cuz remember, the British navy and it's dominance over the oceans was absolutely vital to it's ability to preserve it's overseas influence. And the most important component of this at the time was India. So, Wilson is going after the allies in his vision for the world. So what are some of the problems with this vision, that Wilson articulates? First, he envisioned it as an evolutionary and voluntary system. That would take time to take hold. He was low to include some type of binding commitment within the leading covenant, that would legally obligate the United States to intervene in Europe if some some country. Like Germany, sought to alter the borders that had been imposed on Germany in the Peace Settlement of 1919. This creates a huge problem for the league's long term viability because it would be hard to organize cooperation among it's members, to enforce the league's provisions when countries like Germany and Italy violated those terms in the 1930s. They could do it, because it didn't look like the league signatories were prepared to defend its rules. Second, Wilson couldn't get congressional approval for the league. Which effectively killed it as an international institution before it could even get off the ground. And this has important implications for thinking about how democracy in the United States, shapes a President's ability to implement his preferred foreign policies. Wilson didn't consult with Congress and Congress checked him. And it really undermined his ability to implement, the peace accord that he had tried to negotiate in 1919 and 1920. And obviously, we can see the parallel today of the significance and the need for Presidents to get some type of congressional approval and the parallel between Obama and now Republican control of both the House and the Senate. 