 Some of you have asked us on the discussion board, where we would place President Obama on the continuum of grand strategies? And I think he fits, a lot of you would disagree with me a little bit, I think he fits in the Liberal Internationalist Camp. And let me identify a couple of reasons for this. First, we see lots of willingness for international cooperation in the West Point speech. He repeatedly reaffirms the need to work with partners to, to confront the security challenges of the day, notably terrorism. Second, he is still supportive of democracy promotion and arguably, and I talked about this on Tuesday, has broadened it to talk about human dignity. But, he has backed off democracy promotion as a benchmark, by which to evaluate policies such as the success of the surge in Afghanistan. And this is where he differs slightly from the Bush administration. While Obama might be quick to laud any progress toward democracy in Afghanistan. He doesn't want to hold it out as a goal that must be met, as part of America's larger political and military operations. Third, Obama is clearly willing to use military force in support of American goals and so we see this fusion. Of military power and international institutions that's really the hallmark of liberal internationalism. Fourth, if we label, and we're gonna do that in a second, if we label his predecessor as someone who implemented a grand strategy of primacy, Obama has clearly pulled back from that by withdrawing troops from Iraq, and drawing down our military commitment. In Afghanistan after initially surging it. Now of course, as you will note from your readings that were assigned today, Berry Posen clearly disagrees with this assessment. He thinks that Obama is more like President Bush than I do. And I suspect Rob disagrees with me as well, but I think he's gonna come out of that from the other side of the grand strategy spectrum. >> All right so we have gotten a few questions about the difference between, liberal internationalism and selective engagement. And I think this is a good question because a, at times they do look quite similar and so I'm going to come at the, this discussion about what. Kind of grand strategy President Obama is following from the other side. I mean, some people would critique it as being too close to his predecessor, George W Bush, and, and much more like primacy. That's what Barry Posen argues. But also, there's a set of critics who would say that he's not dedicated enough to using, especially, U.S. military force. To solve humanitarian, and other liberal goals and problems around the world. And, so let me start with a clip from John Oliver that sort of captures this idea of President Obama as sort of an unwilling, or hesitant liberal internationalist. Let's run the clip. >> Iraq yet again, and the world is experiencing a little deja boom. This time, though, it is strictly for humanitarian reasons, to prevent the genocide of the Azidi people. And when he announced the air strikes, the President was anxious to make two things clear. One, how this was the right thing to do, and two, how little he wanted to do it. >> I know that many of you are rightly concerned about any American military action in Iraq, even limited strikes like these. I understand that. American combat troops will not be returning to fight in Iraq. >> I've gotta say, the President sounds a lot like a girl who's trying to reassure her friends, she's not getting back together with the ex-boyfriend that they all hate. Look guys, look guys, I'm just getting a drink with Iraq, okay. He's having a really tough time right now. I will not be returning back to his place. Although, you know what, text me at 10 o'clock tonight and remind me that he was a nightmare. Remind me of that. That's good for me to hear. >> So we're just getting a drink with Iraq, right. We're not gonna stick around with that. So. Let me first say, that President Obama's words strongly suggest that he is a liberal internationalist. And so I would agree with Pat's assessment here that rhetorically, he talks the talk by emphasizes key values such as protecting human rights, the promotion of democracy, and other value laden ideals. Such as economic, equity, women's rights, environmental protection. But this other critique that's different from Pose's which sees Obama as two activists in a way. Concentrates on the question of whether the of, of Obama's faith in America's ability to remake the world in its own image, which is arguably a key element of liberal internationalism. In other words, along the continuum between idealism and realism. Obama is arguably too much of a realist, from certain person's perspectives to be a liberal internationalist. This pushes him closer to this sort of offshore balance or camp. He's often reluctant to commit U.S. Military force in support of moral causes. Like avoiding humanitarian disasters. For example, think of Obama's debacle with the red line on serious use of chemical weapons. For a liberal internationalist, Obama seems to be too skeptical of the United States ability to fashion outcomes such as, and, and, engage in nation building. And to create that liberal environment. That is at the center of liberal internationalism. And so, one could argue that he is no Woodrow Wilson or, for that matter, Harry S Truman, that's willing to sort of be as expansive as necessary to kind of make and craft this international environment that is liberal in nature. And so this current crisis with ISIS when it first emerged President Obama was very much engaged in trying to get Iraq to fix their problems politically and domestically by in, by building a more inclusive government that would incorporate the Sunnis more effectively. So that they wouldn't be attracted to a radical force like ISIS, and so in that part before he started to kinda go stronger in with U.S. Military engagement. He looked like he was going to again try to have his partners in their region act before the United States does. And, and this is something that I think is also a problem if you will for the Obama presidency in terms of categor, categor, categorizing it, right. And that is, he categorized his won foreign policy in a statement in 2014, that got a lot of attention in the following words. He said, you hit singles, you hit doubles, every once in a while you may be able to hit a home run. But, we steadily advance the interests of the American people, and our partnership with folks around the world. He said that this kind of foreign policy may not be sexy, but it did avoid errors and keeps the United States from in his words doing stupid stuff. And so, he received a lot of criticism, not only from the Republicans, which might've been expected, but also from some Democrats, who thought that that sort of vision for foreign policy was simply too constrained and too reactive. And so, let me again be clear, this isn't meant as a critique of the foreign policy decisions, necessarily, but basically trying to be more specific about how to best categorize this approach. Is it more similar to selective balancers, in action at least, than liberal internationalists like Wilson or Truman? Again rhetorically, he has that vein of liberal, commitment to liberal causes, but I'm not sure if he's acting that way all the time. >> As committed as you want him to be? >> Yes. 