 Let's get to our last grand strategy, and that is primacy. And primacy is a grand strategy that is focused on establishing and maintaining American hegemony in the world. It's primary goal is to avoid the emergence of a strong rival to American power. Like liberal internationalism and selective engagement, primacy sees national interests and threats to U.S. security as global and expansive, rather than regional. However, unlike liberal internationalism or selective engagement, which both seek to work multi-laterally with partners to secure american interests, primacy is very suspicious of multilateral means and international organizations. And prefers for the United States to act unilaterally or going alone when combating threats. In order to do this, primacy relies upon American possessing preponderant, extraordinary military and economic power that is much greater than its, its adversaries. Primacy also tends to put a premium on military power, hard power, rather than economic or cultural power, soft power. Primacy, and its focus on unilateral military power, tends to be viewed as squarely in the realist school of international relations, as opposed to idealism which has an emphasis on values. And that's a key distinction between primacy and liberal internationalism. However, what is interesting about primacy particularly in its latest manifestation under George W Bush, is that primacy can have a strong emphasis on values particularly democracy promotion, as motivations for American projection of power and military interventions. Pat will discuss this aspect of primacy further in a discussion of primacy and neoconservatism. Primacy as, as a critique, primacy is often faulted for being too ambitious and costly, as well as harming American prestige abroad, due to it's willingness to work, its, its unwillingness and reluctance to work with the global community. And so, that's the chief critique. But let's move onto this. >> Yeah. So now, I wanna talk a little bit about President Bush's grand strategy as an example of primacy. To do so, I think it's first instructive to talk uh,a bit more about the relationship between primacy and the overarching ideology of the Bush administration's foreign policy, that was nested in neoconservatism. You can think of the grand strategy of the Bush administration as a neoconservative variant of primacy. Primacy does not have to have some underlying moral purpose that animates it, it doesn't have to have an underlying moral purpose, but it can and it did during the Bush administration. Primacy itself though is about dominating the military and political structure of international politics. It's about preventing the emergence of any new potential competitor. And so, primacy folks in the mid 1990's, what they're saying is we have a gift from the Soviet Union, they collapsed, they left us without a peer competitor. We wanna prevent the emergence of any peer competitor in the future, so let's go ahead and remake the world now while we have such a huge advantage. So now, let's talk a little bit neo-conservatism. So, we can see the, these links that existed in the Bush administration. I wanna start with a little historical background on this political movement in the United States cuz it's an interesting one. It's undergone a massive ideological shift from the left to the right of American politics since its inception in the 1930s. It started out as a group of intellectuals that had been excluded from Ivy League schools. They were Trotskyites, which meant that they were staunch anti-S,there was a staunch anti-Soviet component to their foreign policies as Trotsky had been purged by Stalin. And, this is important, they didn't think that FDR was sufficiently interventionist. So, FDR was too conservative, you had to go further left when dealing with the domestic economy during the great depression. In short, neoconservatives in the 1930's wanted more socialism,they were socialists. This movement was pushed to the right. The political writing in the United States by the domestic turmoil associated with Vietnam and the 1960's more broadly. They opposed the blaming of the United States and its policies, say in Vietnam, that were part of this larger generational or cultural backlash against the government. And they begun to abandon and abhor the political left. In the 1960's, among the neo conservatives, you can also, in their academic writings, you can also see the emergence of a skepticism about the potential for social engineering through public policy. So, neoconservatives oppose the policies associated with the great society program of LBJ, including ones that supported affirmative action. They didn't necessarily disagree with the intent behind these policies. Instead, they thought, and still do think that social life is simply too complex to re-engineer. Consequently, a big government policy, like healthcare, like Obamacare, or the construction of large housing projects in cities like Chicago, that were designed to make housing more affordable, could generate some negative unintended consequences like growth and criminal activity in those targeted sections of a city. I bring up this historical antecedent because it sets up a contradiction with the foreign policies of President Bush in Iraq, which effectively tried to engineer a new democratic society there. And there have been lots of negative unintended consequences, say the political strengthening of Iran for one. And, it's on these grounds where we can see the emergence of a debate and a hand wringing within the neoconservative movement, say post 2006. And, in the beginnings of some criticism of President Bush, for trying to do just that, overreaching something that neoconservatives knew wouldn't work, going back to the 1960's. So, during the 1970's, just as they were moving to the right, the neocons become increasingly frustrated with traditional realists in the Republican Party, like President Nixon and Henry Kissinger. Neocons didn't wanna negotiate with the communists, like Nixon was doing in China. And they didnt necessarily think it was right to pursue a pragmatic line, like Nixon was doing with the Soviets during the period of Detente. Instead, they prefered to continue efforts to confront and roll back the Soviet threat. As a consequence, neoconservatives possess a natural affinity with the foreign policy views of Ronald Reagan, at least in his first administration, who famously labeled, Reagan calls the Soviets the evil empire in public. His electoral victory in 1980 thus helped to more fully align the neoconservatives with the republican party in the United States. Reagan also plays an important role in fostering the rise of evangelicals within the republican party and an important part of the evange, an for, important, foreign policy component of evangelical foreign policy views, is they like to see cooperation between the United States and Israel as well. Okay. So, let's talk a little bit about the foreign policy views or interests of the neo-cons. As already noted, they were staunchly anti-Soviet and supported Reagan's escalation of the Cold War. These views were shaped by a prominent neo conservative intellectual, Albert Wohlstetter who is a president at the University of Chicago and worked at the Rand institute. Wohlstetter wrote a lot about the delicacy of the nuclear balance during the Cold War, and worried that the Soviets constantly sought to secure something called first strike capability, in which the Soviets would launch a surprise nuclear attack against American nuclear forces and then, destroy our forces before we had a chance to respond. And the historical parallel here is to 1941 in Pearl Harbor. And what Wohlstetter is worried about is that, in such a situation, America's promise to protect Europe by deterring a Soviet invasion with a nuclear response would become inoperative. So, Wohlstetter regularly advocates a hard line position that pushes American officials to sustain and escalate the arms race with the Soviet Union. As I mentioned earlier, the neoconservatives also favor strong support for Israel in American foreign policy. I just wanna note that this wasn't always the case, definitely not in the 1940s and the 1950s, but this shift in foreign policy views with respect to Israel occurs, or is prompted by Israel Israel's wars in 1967 and 1973. After 1991, and here's where we're gonna see their strong connection with primacy. After 1991, the Neocons sought to embrace the gift associated with the collapse of the Soviet Union. The United States should adopt a foreign policy that guaranteed its military dominance over everyone and expansion of this edge over rivals would deter any future challenges. More importantly, the US could use this dominance to remake the world in it's own image, that is, championing both democracy and free markets. So, even though president George W Bush had initially proposed a series of foreign policies that were more like off shore balancing, as a candidate, he had populated his administration with many neoconservatives. When the attacks on 9 11 then occur, and when they demanded a revolutionary approach, or when he believed that they demanded a revolutionary approach to deal with this new threat, the ideas of the neocons help to fill that policy space. Or that ideas vacuum within the administration that, that was really prompted by the need to respond right away. And so, we can see all the tenets of primacy in Bush's grand strategy. So, there's a strong willingness to use force unilaterally when the U.S. was threatened. Justification for this was spelled out in the national security statement that we read last week. There's also a skepticism of international institutions, think about this if you've watched John Bolton on Fox News, he was the representator of the ambassador to the United Nations who publicly has stated effectively many times, that he doesn't think the institution or the organization has a lot of political value at least externally. Deep skepticism of international institutions, administration officials saw them as too constraining. In an era of new threats that might demand an immediate response, and so the bush administration didn't want to be tied down. It's a bit ironic but the administration allows Colin Powell to go to the U.N to try and get approval for American attacks against Iraq in 2003. But this ultimately proved to be Powell's undoing, because when he doesn't get approval for that second resolution, it then undermines his power within the larger bureaucratic battle within the Bush administration and he increasingly is pushed out after that. The next slide I think is gonna put up a quote from President Bush's state of the union address in, in 2007 and this gives you a flavor, I'm not gonna read it, but is give you a flavor for how central a democracy promotion was to his foreign policy. You can find pretty similar language in every other significant speech on foreign policy that Bush gives after 2002. It's really the foundational idea that guides his foreign policy ideas and beliefs but also his foreign policies. 