 Following the attacks on 9/11 the Bush Administration underwent a broad examination of American foreign policy. There was an immediate response in Afghanistan and there was a much larger internal debate. If you're interested in more on this look at Bob Woodward's first book on the war in Afghanistan and you can get some of this internal debate. There's a real concern we've got to do something right away but we also need a much larger strategy to remake the Middle East because it looks like sources of terrorism lie in the institutions there. So this document that you read for today is a re-statement of American grand strategy in the aftermath of 9/11. It demonstrates a critical break with the past. And so, Matt Dowd is talking earlier that we haven't had a grand strategy for the last 20 years, and what he seems to mean there, well, we had a grand strategy during the Cold War, we don't have one now. As I said, I disagree with this strongly. We have a grand strategy during the Bush Administration and you can see it written down in this document. It demonstrates a clear break with past. We're no longer in a Cold War world in which the United States can rely on deterrence, and this is critical. Deterrence is about making threats to protect American citizens. And the argument is that we can't deter terrorists. As a consequence we now have to think about defense, which -- and it talks about this in the document as well. A good defense might necessitate a good offense. And we're going to see, and we're going to talk about this throughout the semester, at base this is destabilizing to the larger structure of international politics and this is responsible for a lot of the blowback to the United States. But this shift in American policy is oriented in a belief that we can no longer -- we cannot deter terrorists and so we have to change the strategy that we relied on during the Cold War. Second critical thing I want to point out here is that identifies a class of states, rogue nations that are enemies to the United States. This is a clear statement and this is often a critical component of grand strategy. And part of what's going on here is as well is by looping in rogue states into this and then later on talking about states that harbor terrorists, there's also some political preparation going on in this document for the war in Iraq that's going to follow in about a year. Relatedly, and this follows from the second point, is they intentionally did not differentiate from terrorists and those who harbor them. And this was part of the strategy for justifying the war in Afghanistan, but this was also -- so if you think about not being able to deter terrorist actors, this statement is an attempt to try and deter other state actors, other governments who are thinking about harboring terrorists. The big thing in terms of stabilizing international politics and altering the larger international order is that this document clearly justifies a doctrine of preemption and this generates a ton of controversy. And this is a critical shift from the Cold War strategy of deterrence. In other words, the United States says if we think that there's a clear and present danger to us we will act militarily. This generates a larger debate about who defines what's a clear and present danger and our allies get really nervous about this. And this is important for a lot of the blowback, particularly from our allies, not just in the Middle East. And the final point I want to note on this, and this follows with our larger focus on ethics today, note the important integration of moral concerns in this document, particularly those with respect to the promotion of democracy and poverty alleviation. This is an important statement and an adjustment of a larger American foreign policy. We didn't have this during the Cold War and there are all kinds of famous quotes, say, from George Kennan who was a critical author of the doctrine of Containment. Yes we want Democrats, but the Democrats also have to be good anti-Communists and if they're not anti-Communists maybe we don't like the Democrats as much. This is very different from that statement, right, this is about the promotion of Democracy and poverty alleviation. 