 Rob and I want to examine the larger grand strategy debate in the United States in the aftermath of the Bush administration. And we intentionally chose two opposing readings today that give you an, an outline of this debate. And one thing, so, let me just give you kind of a brief backdrop to this and kinda what I think they're trying to do. And then, I think Rob's gonna have a few words about Posen and then I'll, then I'll talk about the response. The first thing to realize in the Posen article is, Posen is collapsing the grand strategy debate that we've given you here.Um, we've given you four variants, and Posen now argues that there are essentially two variants in the United States. He thinks that liberal internationalism and primacy has been fused into one. And here more, and I should say as a backdrop. So, this is initial article Posen had a book that to build on and developed these ideas that came out last year. And this idea is developed more in the book, but I just wanna give you some of the, some of the background here. And, so Posen thinks that liberal internationalism and primacy have been fused in America politics. And now, we just have this thing called liberal hegemony. And then he thinks that the isolationists and the offshore balancers are kind of fused now. And that's where Posen puts himself. As a, as a critic of liberal hegemony. The second thing that I'd like to say about this debate is that it really, to me, is about a disagreement in the long term value of the American military position around the world. What are its costs and what are its benefits, right? And, and posing as skeptical. And Brooks at all think that we need to recognize the long-term benefits of this. We're, and so you might think of them as saying, we're willing to make these investments and Posen is more skeptical. Rob. >> All right. So, let me just try to summarize a bit the Posen argument. And, and Posen makes. Several assertions that you should take with a grain of salt and see how, you know, convincing they are to you. But first he makes an argument against American activism and he says that American activism has essentially caused mostly bad results and it has ended up producing three primarily poor outcomes. First, anti-American balancing. And so what he argues is that because of our activist foreign policy, which he again says is, says is sort of a monolithic across the last three presidencies, you know, Clinton and Bush and Obama all sort of engage in the same kind of A liberal hegemony foreign policy. He says that that has created anti-American balancing in which rival states in particular his example were China and, and Russia, have found themselves bonding together to, to counterbalance the United States, and that's bad for the United States. Secondly, he says this liberal hegemony foreign policy, has ended up getting the United States involved in unending and essentially unwinnable conflicts involving nationalism and identity. And so he says as we get involved in countries like Iraq and Afghanistan, we are getting involved in these intractable nationalist conflicts that we have no business being involved in and have very little hope of actually resolving successfully. And thirdly, he says that the problem with liberal hegemony is that it has allowed our allies to shirk their responsibilities, especially their responsibilities of securing their own defense. And so because of the way the United States has engaged in this activist foreign policy, Europe has had to spend less money and put forth less effort to defend itself from it's threats, as has Japan and says that really, we need to get our allies to do more. And so how would we do this? What Posen argues is that we first have to focus, we have to pri, prioritize three missions. One, preventing the rise of a powerful rival. Two, fighting terrorism. And three, preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. If we focus on these three missions we can then do the other goals which are essentially to reduce American involvement around the world. And how do we do that? First, we, according to Posen, should reduce our alliance commitments. By reducing our alliance commitments, especially in Europe, then European's role being forced into doing more to protect themselves. And third we need to avoid counter insurgency. We have to stop invading countries with at least the partial goal of reforming those societies to make them less supportive of terrorism. That Posen argues, always backfires. And so instead of doing those sort of counter insurgency intervention we need to find other ways of combatting terrorism. And so, he, he wants to pull back from that. And finally if we do all of these things Posen argues that we can substantially reduce the size of the military. And reducing the size of the military will help lock in, from Posen's perspective this more restrained foreign policy that he says will be essential to kinda recalibrating U.S. foreign policy away from this overly activist foreign policy. So. >> So let me just say a couple of things about the, the Brooks response and then we'll go to some questions on the board. And I think you might look at the Brooks response as nested in the historical experience of the inter war period, where the argument is the U.S. helped to create a new political order in 1919 with President Wilson. He fails to get the League of Nations pass Congress, and the U.S. withdraws slowly over the course of the 1920's and the 1930's, this creates a vacuum in Europe. Which creates the conditions that then allow Hitler to remake the territorial status quo, allow the Nazis to take power, and then to get very aggressive overturning the, the Versailles agreements. And what Brooks and all are suggesting are, there could be significant, and I think they talk about this as the devil we don't know. There could be significant consequences for an American pullback from around the world. When the U.S. pulls back, this is going to alter the distribution of powers, say, in the Middle East, in Iraq. And then we can have to go back in, because we could get bad guys like Hitler emerging, or we could get, we could get new threats emerging that, that, that could hurt American interests. And so it's better to stay the course. Moreover, we get lots of benefits from this. In a sense, it allows us to keep open markets. And we get influence over our, our allies in the regions. And so he talks, they talk about the ability to control allies and prevent our allies from getting in conflicts that we don't want. I think they use the example of Taiwan. And so it's an expanded American position or you can think about this in the context of South Korea as well. Expanded American position abroad, gives us influence over the foreign policies of these countries, and so we can prevent them from starting new conflicts. They also disagree with the idea that this stuff costs a lot. Although they're a little fuzzy on their math in part because they say it's just hard to estimate, but really what they want to do and they're trying to set up an argument is imagine how much worse the costs would be if the U.S. pulls back wholesale from some region around the world, and then we have to go back in with an expanded expanded military presence. 