 The United States shaped how World War I ended and the terms of the peace settlement that followed which were established by the treaty, by the Versailles Treaty. Just because the United States played in an important role in defeating Germany and Woodrow Wilson possessed radical new ideas to construct a peaceful international order, the United States could not set the terms of peace unilaterally. Let me repeat that. They could not set the terms of peace unilaterally. Instead, the United States, Great Britain and France engaged in an extended six month bargaining session to remake Europe and the World. I would say that history has never seen an instant, instance where so few people. Three to be exact. Woodrow Wilson, David Lloyd George and prime, the Prime Minister of Great Britain and George Clemenceau, the Prime Minister of France held the fate of so much of human kind in their hands. Literally by the end of the peace talks, these three men were sitting in their hotels without their advisors dividing up the world, setting future governments and setting the rights of some ethnic groups around the world to proclaim their own political independence. Despite his lofty aspirations, Wilson had to make a lot more concessions to traditional European politics than he wanted. This meant incorporating French demand for a harsh peace on Germany and quasi recognition of traditional imperial rights. For both the French and the British as the costs associated with trying to preserve the League of Nations. So he traded his emphasis on the League of Nations for some concessions about basically imperial rights for French and Great Britain which went against his anti-imperial message. Let's brief you, briefly look at some of the components of the Versailles Treaty. They are important because they helped to lay the groundwork for the war in Europe 20 years later, World War II. These terms were presented as a take it or leave it offer to the Germans in June of 1919. They were summoned to Paris, and told that they had a week to accept these terms, or face invasion. Germany's new Democratic government after some significant hesitation, accepted the terms of the Versailles treaty. Germany lost its navy, its colonies, much of its merchant marine, and its army was limited to 100,000 soldiers. The Allies had already secured political change in Germany back in November as part of the Armistice. This meant that the imperial government of the kaiser had been overthrown and a new democracy had emerged in its place. This is going to be important later on because this new democracy would be severely stressed because of these settlement terms. Think here about a contradiction. If the Allies, particularly Wilson, were so keen on securing a democracy in Germany, then why did they make it so hard for that democracy to survive by forcing severe concessions on it. Because domestically, that would threaten that democratic government. The German people would later punish the democratic government for trying to comply with these very same settlement terms that the allies, Germany, I mean the US, Great Britain and France forced on Germany. This peace would regularly breathe new life into conservative, nationalist forces in Germany, whose principal foreign policy goals were to overturn the new European status quo that was enshrined in the Versailles Treaty. Most importantly, from the map on this slide, you can see that Germany suffered significant territorial losses in the west, north, and east. The industrial heartland of Germany in the west was demilitarized and occupied by the Allies. These territorial losses would provide the impetus for Hitler's irredentist claims in the 1930s. Which would be subsequently used to justify coercive threats, and war. Ethnic Germans had been severed from their political homeland, and pushed into minority status in Poland, and Czechoslovakia, by Versailles. Conservatives would later argue in the twenties and thirties that these territories had to be reincorporated back into Germany. Notice the parallel here between Germans left out of Germany by the construction of new international boundaries and the situation in Ukraine today. If you remember, Hillary Clinton made a statement, and got into some controversy when the crisis first broke out for comparing Putin to Hitler. She said that Vladimir Putin was doing the very same thing, using a claim to protect co-ethnics outside of Russian borders, to invade another sovereign country. So. >> So now, we're gonna talk a little bit about the economic components of the Peace Settlement. The, the Peace Settlement imposes huge economic costs on Germany through reparations. These were transfer payments sometimes made with in-kind payments like coal. Made by the German government, principally to the governments of France, Belgium, and Great Britain. Originally, these payments were slated to continue for 60 years. France lobbied heavily for this. Wilson resisted, and then later acquiesces. You can think about reparations as a commitment or enforcement device imposed on Germany to ensure that it would abide by the terms of the settlement. By redirecting any surplus public revenues to the Allies, it would make it harder for Germany to rebuild its army and then retake it's lost territories. These payments created huge long term problems for the German government. And you could think of these political difficulties by imagining what would happen if Barack Obama announced tomorrow that the marginal rate on everyone's income taxes in the United States was going up by 5% to expand the foreign aid budget. Or to pay off developing countries, like China, so they would quit polluting. Obviously, this would be a political nonstarter in the United States. And effectively, it was a political nonstarter in Germany as well. A stable reparation system in Europe only exists from 1924 to 1928, when there was a steady stream of American loans flowing to the German government. When the Federal Reserve increases interest rates in 1928 to try and slow the Stock Market, these foreign loans halted, and Germany pushes for reductions on its reparations payment. So the reparation system imposes huge costs on Germany and it only works when American banks finance it. When American banks stop financing the reparations system, Germany pulls back and demands re-negotiations. There's another complication to this cycle of credit. Effectively, the proceeds from these loans. Loans to be in from the United States to the Germans were then redirected to Britain and France in the form of reparation payments. And then Britain, France, and Belgium, they used these reparation payments so they could repay war loans to the American government. Thus, we can see how important American capital and American foreign policy was to preserving one of the key elements of this settlement, that the reparation cl- clauses. So you get American loans to Germany, Germany repays, or pays reparations to Britain, France, and Belgium. And then they used those reparation receipts to repay American banks. So when American capital slows to Germany in 1928, the reparation deal begins to collapse and the Versailles Treaty begins to erode as well. So now I wanna talk briefly about how the terms of the Versailles treaty helped to set the stage for World War II. First, as we talked about already, the reparations and territorial clauses helped to destabilize the new Weimar democracy in Germany. The settlement pushed the German government to impose unpopular economic policies. Which steadily shrank its parliamentary majority throughout the 1920s. Democracy effectively died in Germany in July of 1930, when the chancellor obtained emergency decree powers from the president. Because he could no longer secure a working majority in parliament to implement the economic policies in Germany that were necessary to comply with Versailles, to generate the revenues to make these reparation payments. So consequently, Versailles contributes to World War II by undermining fledgling democratic institutions in Germany and opening the door for Hitler's Nazi party. Second, apart from weakening Germany's domestic institutions that were needed to enforce Germany's international obligations, the settlement provided a focal point by which conservative nationalist politicians, like Hitler and the Nazi Party, could mobilize popular support for action to overthrow the Versailles Treaty by force, if necessary. The Peace Settlement, in some senses, helped to foster the fascist movement associated with Hitler. Third, Wilson fails to secure ratification of this ambitious treaty at home in the United States. The Senate dramatically rejects the Versailles Treaty and, as a conseq-, and as a consequence, the League of Nations twice. It was a humiliating defeat for Wilson, in part, because there were strong progressive wings to both the Democratic and Republican parties that supported the war and a broadly internationalist foreign policy after it, including some type of alliance relationship with both Great Britain and France. In short, the domestic politics were there to support a new internationalist foreign policy, say associated with the liberal internationalist grand strategy after World War I. But Wilson squanders this. Why? In part, because he doesn't want to negotiate over Article Ten. Article Ten of the League covenant plays a critical role in killing the treaty. As many Senators worried the language of the treaty would create a legally binding obligation for the United States to enforce, either through sanctions or military actions, violations of the treaty. Some tre-, some senators worried that this effectively meant that Congress could be surrendering its powers to declare war in the future. So, if Wilson interprets Article 10 slightly differently or gets concessions from the Allies probably could have gotten more Senators to sign off on it. Wilson had moved the American public pretty far towards embracing global interests and responsibilities, since 1914. The US had played a critical role in the emergence of a new global political status quo over the period from 1918 to 1920. The challenge was that the American public was not quite ready to support that New World in 1920, at least in terms of the obligations that it looked like Wilson was creating through the Versailles Treaty. Why is this important? This implicates American policy in the larger global collapse that would follow in the coming decades, because the maintenance of this new system the, the Treaty of Versailles system, it had been generated through extensive American involvement. And so when the US pulls back, so also is the support for that system undermined. Moreover, this history about the consequences of American forward movement into Europe and then withdrawal provides a cautionary tale for today, I think, in the Middle East. Long term political stability that requires a long term commitment of resources. American commitment of resources. We see some of the problems associated with preserving this new order. When the US withdrew in, Iraq in large part, because that is what the American public wanted. Now this opens up a big question that harkens back to 1920. How long will the American public support its government's efforts to stabilize the region? And what happens to regional stability when that support is withdrawn? 