 Now I want to talk about how the end of World War One shaped American foreign policy in the 1920's. This brief module asks the following question: Was the United States isolationist after World War One? The conventional wisdom suggests that the answer to this questions is yes. After defeating Germany, the United States returned to the safety of North America and withdrew from European politics. A number of policy choices are pointed to as evidence in support of this claim. First, as we already discussed, the Senate rejected the Versaille Treaty and The League of Nations. This treaty review power is del -- the power to review treaties is delegated to the Senate by the Constitution. Wilson clearly should have incorporated the policy views of the Senate during the negotiations in Europe over the peace settlement to ensure that any compromise would be approved by the Senate. Many historians argue that this was one of the great leadership failures in Wilson's presidency. His failure to secure support from the Senate undermined Wilson's key institutional solution for European politics after the war, namely the League of Nations. And this domestic political failure in the United States also suggested to the world that the US was not commited to being involved in European politics after the war. In other words, it suggested that isolationist sentiment in the United States had reasserted itself. Second, successive Republican administrations following Woodrow Wilson also limited international trade by increasing tariffs. These policies reinforced isolationism by insulating the American economy from European producers and European competition. They also complicated the preparation situation for Germany by making it harder for Germans to generate an exports surplus necessary to make their reparation payments. Third, the Republicans also resisted any compromise on war debts. Loans that had been made by the United States government to its British and French allies during the war. War debt relief in the 1920's held out the possibility of alleviating the political tensions associated with reparations because Britain and France tried to tie political questions over war debts and reparations together. The British and the French offered to reduce their reparations demands from Germany if the United States relaxed its demand for the repayment of British and French war debts to the United States. When the United States failed to offer this relief, the British and French remained uncompromising on the reparations issue. Fourth, tight monetary policy by the Federal Reserve pushed interest rates up in the United States in 1928 and complicated Germany's adherence to the Versailles Treaty. Higher returns on capital in the United States from these higher interest rates limited capital exports or loans from the United States to Germany and deprived Germany of the capital it needed to finance reparation payments. This policy of higher interest rates is often cited as an example of the failure of the Federal Reserve to lead the global economy. The Fed missed a chance to prop up the German economy and the larger political settlement in Europe through financial means. In an upcoming module, we will talk about how this missed opportunity would also contribute to the Great Depression. Thus the United States complicated the reparations issue in at least two ways by failing to forgive war debts and by making it harder for the Germans to borrow money in the New York money market. Now on the other hand, a lot of historical research, recent historical research challenges this claim that the United States returned to its tradition of isolationism after World War One. While the American government clearly shied away from using military threats to influence European politics, it still remained heaviliy involved in European and global politics. The United States exhibited a preference for utilizing access to American capital and relying on private economic actors particularly large financial firms like J.P. Morgan to pressure European governments into compromised arrangements in the 1920's. For example, the ability to float new German government loans on Wall Street facilitated the Dawes Plan that helped to restart the reparations system and reparation payments in 1925. J. P. Morgan also used the French government's need for emergency loans during this period to force concessions on the French government in the same set of negotiations. So this tacit support for private loans though was largely limited to the period from 1925 to 1928 and it was choked off at the end in 1928 by the switch in Federal Reserve policy that we just highlighted. So to sum up on this, the United States was involved in European politics, but relied on private economic actors and access to American capital to try and shape political negotiations in Europe. Now, the Washington Naval Conference was also a dramatic success for the Harding administration and suggested in the success of this negotiation suggests that the United States was not isolationist during this period. The Naval Conference committed the great powers of the world to a very important arms control agreement with respect to naval construction. This agreement created a fiscal windfall for all the governments involved by saving money on military spending. It also helped to provide the means to prevent new American political rivalries with the strongest naval powers in Asia and Europe respectively namely Japan and Great Britain. And so we see again, American involvement in global politics facilitating an important arms control agreement. In short, there's a lot of evidence that the United States was definitely not withdrawing from the world. A recent book by Adam Tues that's cited on this slide argues that there was a lot of continuity in the transition from Wilson to Republican administrations in the 1920's. He characterizes the Republican leaders and presidents as triumphant nationalists. They were willing to implement an activist foreign policy outside of North America, but wanted to preserve the right to act unilaterally. As a recap to this section, I just want you to know that there's a lot of recent historical research that challenges the conventional wisdom that the United States returned to an isolationist foreign policy after World War One. I think it's pretty safe to say that the US was not isolationist if the basline for comparison is George Washington's Farewell Address in 1796, however, it might be easier to argue that the US was a little isolationist relative to a baseline that rested on what the world needed from the United States in 1920. Woodrow Wilson had moved the American public pretty far towards embracing global interests and responsibilities since 1914. The United States had played a critical role in the emergence of a new global political status quo over the period from 1918 to 1920. The challenge was that the American public was not yet ready to support that new world order in 1920 with an expanded military presence in Europe or higher taxes necessary to grant war debt relief to the Europeans. This implicates American policy in the larger global collapse that would follow in the coming decades and it suggests that the failure of the United States to assume a leadership position over the larger international order in the latter part of the 1920's would contribute to the Great Depression and weaken the European status quo, making it even more vulnerable to the Nazi onslaught in the 1930's. In an upcoming lecture segment, the underlying question for this section, namely was the United States isolationist after World War One is going to get a clearer answer. The Great Depression really pushes American foreign policy into isolation and overcoming this shift becomes one of the most significant challenges faced by President Roosevelt in the latter half of the 1930's. 