 This section continues the lead up to World War II by examining how The Great Depression contributed to its outbreak. Before making this connection, I wanna take a few minutes to tell you a little bit about The Great Depression and the American role in helping to sustain it. The Great Depression was a dramatic, global economic downturn that begins in 1928 and lasts throughout the 1930's for many countries. The worst of the collapse really happens from 1929 to 1933, you are probably aware of the more recent Great Recession that followed the financial crisis in the fall of 2008. In this most recent crisis, unemployment topped out at about 10% in the United States. To give you some sense of how much worse it was in The Great Depression, industrial unemployment hit 25% in the United States and 34% in Germany in 1931. Agriculture also got hammered. From 1925 until 1932, average agricultural prices fell by about 75%. In practical terms, this effectively means if you were selling a bushel of corn for a dollar in 1925, you could only sell it for twenty five cents in 1932. For all the farmers, particularly in the Americas, who had taken out loans to expand production during World War I. They could no longer pay their debts, because prices and their revenues had collapsed so dramatically. This is the same thing that's happening to oil producers in the United States today. >> Right. >> Collapse of oil prices. They're not generating, generating as many revenues. Which making it harder for them to pay their loans, that were taken out to expand production in North Dakota over the last five years. So these financial difficulties would help to create a series of regional, these fi -- I should say these financial difficulties for farmers, would help to create a series of regional banking crisis in the United States in the early 1930's. That would then become a national banking emergency in 1933. Another way to think about how dramatic this price collapse is, is to think about what might happen to your expected salary after College if there was another Great Depression while you were still in College. So imagine that you enter College in the Fall of 2014 with the hopes of earning $40,000 in 2018. Except you get to the Spring of 2018, about ready to get your degree, and wage levels in the United States have fallen from about $40,000 a year to $10,000 a year or from say, $20 an hour to $5 an hour. For many students, this collapse in wages would be a huge problem because they would find it impossible in Austin to pay for rent, to pay for food, and to repay those student loans. So this is what happens as a result of the agri, of the collapse of agricultural prices in the 1920s and the 1930s. It destroys farmers and the agricultural industry in the United States. So The Great Depression is also marked by a dramatic collapse in international trade. Over 50%, or the falloff in exports and imports is over 50% for some countries. Which effectively makes it impossible for any country at this time to export their way out of a domestic economic downturn. So on some, the Great Depression was really, really bad. And if you've had any discussions with grandparents or great grandparents who lived through it, and observe there subsequent spending patterns, you can see how dramatic and long term its consequences were. Alright. So now let's talk a little bit about how the U.S., how American policy contributed to the great depression. I think it's fair to say that American policy played an important role and I'm gonna give you some examples of that here. First and this is a monetary story. The federal reserve which is the the central bank of the United States or it's the bank to commercial banks begins to tighten monetary policy in 1928 by raising interest rates. Why did it do that, it was trying to raise the costs of buying stock, or equities on credit, because Wall Street, because prices on Wall Street were accelerating so rapidly. This increase in interest rates though had the effect of making it much more difficult for the German government to borrow money because monetary policy in the United States influenced monetary policy in Germany. Germany had to respond by raising interest rates. This made it harder for German firms and the German government to borrow capital and accelerated an economic contraction there, which was also aggravated by dramatic spending cuts in Germany, particularly on unemployment insurance. The same thing has happened, has happened in the last four years in Greece. So Herbert Hoover campaigns in 1928 on the need to increase agricultural prices. Once president, he followed through on this promise by inviting Congress to raise tariffs. Remember tariffs are taxes on imports. Congress obliges by adopting the Smoot-Hawley tariff, which became the most comprehensive piece of tariff legislation in the nation's history. Congress doesn't stop with agricultural products, and they choose to impose new or higher tariffs on a whole wide range of goods, including industrial products. The effect of this was, though, that it imposes new barriers on foreign companies trying to sell their goods to American consumers. And so, foreign governments in Europe and around the world, responded by shutting out American exports to their economies with tariffs of their own. This new cycle of tariffs had dramatic consequences on the global economy. An international trade, essentially collapses. Finally, FDR takes the United States off the gold standard in 1933. And this policy had effectively been the anchor of choice, for all countries to guard against inflation. He does this in the midst of a banking crisis. And he did it to try and end a cycle of deflation, or falling prices. But this decision damages international monetary relations, because it devalued the American dollar relative to other currencies. And, he did it to help American exporters. By devaluing the dollar relative to other currencies, it made American exports more competitive, or pushing down their prices, thereby threatening the competitiveness of other country's exports. And what FDR is doing here is what everybody else has already done in the four years prior, is trying to help American exporters. But he's doing that in a way that undermines the competitiveness of, say, exporters in Great Britain, France and Germany. With this action though by taking the United States off the gold standard in 1933, FDR was essentially withdrawing the United States from international economic and political cooperation. He had grown so frustrated with the repeated failures of European governments to solve major policy challenges like the struggle over reparations and the Great Depression more generally. He opted for a series of unilateral policies to turn the American economy around. So now I think you get to talk a little bit about the consequences of the Great Depression. >> Great. Alright. So FDR, Franklin D Roosevelt, his choice to focus on American economic recovery inaugurated a brief period of isolationism in US Foreign Policy and this is very important, to understanding the start of World War II. The American public was frustrated with Europe. In the midst of suffering a dramatic economic collapse and wanted the President to focus on domestic challenges. And so this is a time, you know, the Great Depression, in which there was a huge push for, from the public to stop engaging in international affairs and concentrate on the problems at home. The inter, the isolationist wing of Congress was growing stronger. While the security situation in Europe deteriorated over the next five years as Hitler successfully revised numerous components of the Versailles Treaty, the isolationists within the United States pushed the President to remain aloof and distant from any crisis in Europe. And so at precisely the worst time, arguably, for the United States to withdraw from Europe, the isolationists, due to the Great Depression, was pushing for the President to do just that. Congress codified this pressure in passing a series of Neutrality Acts. In 1935, 1936 and 1937, to legally prevent the President from intervening in any European conflict. The first Neutrality Act called for an arms embargo against all belligerence in war. This effectively prevented the President from aiding any side. The second ban loans to states fighting in a war. And the third, echoing the problems of merchant shipping in World War I, forced belligerents to use their own ships to move goods from the United States and thus prevented the, the bombing and, and submarine warfare against US ships. Congress saw war coming in Europe and wanted to prevent the President from drawing the United States into that war. This had significant consequences for global stability because it magnified the political challenge associated with responding to Hitler. The economic and military power if the United States had been necessary to defeat Germany in 1918 during World War I. It's withdrawal from the world stage would create an, a political vacuum in Europe, in Europe and once again enable Germany under Hitler to threaten the continent. Apart from pushing the United States to withdraw from European politics, the Great Depression also contributed to the collapse of the Weimar republic, the Weimar democracy in Germany. Simultaneously paving the way for Hitler's assention. Successive governments in Germany responded to the global crisis by making the economic downturn worse. Faced by declining tax receipts from diminishing economic growth, they cut government spending and raised interest rates, to preserve their commitment to the gold standard. Their financial system then collapsed with a series of banking crises in 1931. The government then steadily eroded the unemployment insurance safety net that had been constructed in the 1920s just as the need for that uninsurance, I mean, that unemployment insurance, accelerated. These economic policies polarized the German electorate. The political center, and the moderate right evaporated. They were pushed to the political right, and into the arms of Hitler's Nazi party. Multiple studies have shown that these domestic political changes were driven by economic voting. The economy is what produced the support for Hitler's Nazi party. These, the groups hurt worse by the depression in Germany, particularly agriculture, and what we would think of today as small business owners, increasingly voted for the Nazis. The domestic political turmoil then set the stage for Hitler's virulent nationalism that was oriented around anti-Semitism, territorial expansion in Eastern Europe to secure new lands for German farmers, and the complete with, overthrow, the reversal, of the Versailles treaty. Over the next six years, Hitler restarted the German economy through a massive program of military armament. It radically shifted the distribution of power in Europe. And ultimately, these moves lead to war in 1939. 