 Now we want to bri, talk briefly about American participation in World War II. The movement toward isolationism on part of the American public, after the Great Depression, dramatically complicated Franklin D Roosevelt's foreign policy in the latter part of the 1930s. Just when the threat posed by Hitler to the world became more clear. War broke out in Europe in the fall, over German threats to retake territory from Poland that had been awarded to it, as part, awarded to Poland, as part of the Versailles treaty. Under Hitler, Germany had embarked on a steady program of expansion and revision of that treaty since 1933. Germany violated its military provisions by lanching, by launching a massive program of rearmament, building up more arms, in 1933. It remilitarized the Rhineland in 1936. Germany then integrated Austria in 1938. Through a series of threats, Germany detached the Sudetenland, where there were a lot of German-speaking citizens, from Czechoslovakia in 1938, through a compromise agreement brokered by the Allies. When Hitler made new demands on Poland in 1939, the Allies reversed course, knowing the further concessions would strengthen Hitler's hold on central Europe. It would be well over two years though, before the United States would formally enter the war against Germany. While hostilities broke out between the two in a series of naval skirmishes between the United States and Germany, in a, a series of naval skirmishes in the Atlantic in the fall of 1941, the two countries were not formally at war until December of 1941. Because of Germany's alliance with Japan, Hitler opted to declare war against the United States after Japan attacked the United States in Pearl Harbor. Germany's declaration of war on the United States eased FDR's political difficulties associated with building public support for American participation in the war in Europe. It rallied the American public, and essentially opinions on the necessity to confront the throat, the threat, posed by Germany, Japan and Italy vanished. It, it, it, there was a united front. FDR had long preferred a Europe first strategy. That is to confront and defeat Germany before dealing with Japan. The return of isolationism in the United States after the Great Depression constrained these interests though. Pushing him to reaffirm privately American support to Churchill, Prime Minister of Great Britain. And rely on economic aid to prop up the British war effort, after Hitler's dramatic military successes in 1940 and 1941. So, instead of getting into the war, Roosevelt had to go behind the scenes, and support Great Britain through economic aid. In the fall of 1941, following Hitler's defeat of France, his successful conquest of territory in Northern and Eastern Europe, and his invasion of his a previous ally, the Soviet Union, the American public still opposed military intervention in the war. Isolationism remained strong, even then, as Hitler was expanding greatly. As noted earlier in the lecture, Congress had constructed a series of neutrality acts, designed to limit executive authority in foreign policy. And, prohibiting economic and military support for countries at war. The concern here was straightforward. If the United States directly supported the British, or French war effort, effectively choosing sides in the coming European conflict, it could find itself set on an irreversible path toward war. This created a significant challenge for FDR. He recognized the threat posed by Hitler, and realized that war would ultimately be necessary, and US involvement in that war would be necessary. After France's defeat in the summer of 1940, he knew that British survival was even more important to American security. However, he also knew the public wasn't ready yet. Thus, he embarked on a dangerous balancing act, where he steadily increased his support for the British, while publicly committing to maintain a non-interventionist foreign policy. So, what did this balancing act really imply? From 1939 until December of 1941, FDR instituted a series of executive maneuvers, and secured congressional authorization for American support of the British war effort. Following the German attack on Poland, he secured a change in the neutrality acts, so that the United States could sell arms to the Allies. By executive order, he traded American destroyers for a series of Naval bases in the Americas that the United States did not really need. Perhaps, most important, FDR convinced Congress of the need to essentially finance the British resistance of Germany, with the Lend-Lease program. This program had enormous implications. In the entire war effort, the United States transferred $50 billion to the Allies. About 32 billion of which went to the British. To facilitate an appropriate comparison, today's term with respect to GDP, the U.S. GDP, or the sum total of economic activity in 1940, was slightly over $100 billion. Thus, over a six year period, the U.S. government spent about half of the total GDP on the Allies' war effort. Current GDP in the United States is about $17 trillion, half of 17 trillion, check my math here, here Professor, is $8.5 trillion. Can you imagine the U.S. spending $8.5 trillion now, over a six year period on someone else's war effort? In short, the Lend-Lease program was huge in the defeat of Germany and Japan. >> Now, all of these constraints on FDR fall away with the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. That attack effectively destroyed isolationism as a grand strategy at that time. 