 Now we are going to fast forward a bit to the end of World War II. And Pat, as Pat noted, the United States began to enter the war on the side of Great Britain and the Allies against Nazi Germany and the Axis powers using economic support first and it's powerful economy to assist in the war effort. Once Japan attacked the United States, all the pretenses of neutrality were banished and the United States entered the war militarily. The Americans entering the war and ultimately helping to defeat Nazi Germany in Europe was a crucial factor and it played an even bigger role in defeating imperial Japan in Asia. In defeating Nazi Germany, the United States found itself in an alliance with the Soviet Union, which would quickly become its chief adversary after World War II, with the emergence of the Cold War. So the first question we will address in moving to this next era of American foreign policy, the Cold War, is the question that plagued FDR at the end of World War II. And that is, why did the alliance during World War II, and this cooperation between the United States and the Soviet Union, collapse so quickly after World War II ended, and evolved into this Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union. Now, in retrospect, the Cold War between a free market democracy in the United States and a communist dictatorship, seemed inevitable given the dramatic differences between the two countries and their political and economic systems, as well as their cultures. Right? However, at the end of World War II the emergent half century long contest between the United States and the Soviet Union was not nearly as clear cut or obvious to political elites and the mass public. President Roosevelt in elements of his administration were famously optimistic about their ability to manage Joseph Stalin and retain the war time alliance that defeated Nazi Germany. When Churchill, Winston Churchill, Prime Minister of Great Britain, warned Roosevelt about Stalin's intentions once Germany was defeated, Roosevelt told him, I just have a hunch that Stalin is not that kind of a man. I think that if I give him everything I possibly can and ask for nothing from him in return, he won't try to annex anything and will work with me for a world of democracy and peace. Oh, Franklin. So, in explaining this quick change from war time allies to Cold War adversaries then, I'm going to emphasize three sets of explanations and they're not mutually exclusive, right? The first explanation, is this competing goals of the two different systems that resulted in very different world views and preferred international systems fro, for the United States and the Soviet Union. Because they wanted two different types of worlds, they were never going to be able to agree in an alliance structure to cooperate on just one. Secondly, there was a history here of mistrust that long predated World War II, that added an underlying antagonism to this systemic and philosophical differences between the two countries. And so, the philosophical differences between the United States and the Soviet Union and provided a lens through which each country would see the other as the aggressor and like, but there is also concrete historical examples that they could attach to those philosophical. Assumptions that helped to increase the mistrust between the two. And thirdly, there is the effect of individuals specifically, the paranoia of Joseph Stalin who saw enemies everywhere, domestically and internationally and fought Cold Wars all the time with everyone around him. And the anti-communism of Harry S. Truman, who was much more virulently anti-communist, anti-Soviet, than Franklin D. Roosevelt. So let's examine these explanations in turn. First, let's look at the Competing Goals. The United States desired a world with open political systems and free market economic and a free market economic system. As Pat noted, it had learned a powerful historical lesson during the 1930s and the 1940s about the consequences of remaining on the sidelines and letting problems fester. So along with desiring a world with democratic governments and national self-determination, the United States under the Truman administration and the Roosevelt administration before it was dedicated to a forwardly engaged US foreign policy and a prominent role for the US in international affairs. A liberal internationalist sort of grand strategy. The Soviet Union on the other hand, wanted a very different type of international system. Having suffered the greatest amount of destruction and casualties at the hands of Nazi Germany, Stalin wanted territory and a sphere of influence in Eastern Europe. These concrete goals were essential in his mind to Soviet national security and a future protection against any Western invasion. The United States was not wiling to talk about spheres of influence, which smacked of the old world politics. Importantly, Stalin had the key resource at his disposal, Soviet troops were already occupying East European countries and so he could easily accomplish his goals on the ground. Now secondly, so those are the competing goals. In addition to these contradictory goals, there soon developed some mutual suspicions and recriminations, accusations from both sides toward the other. These mutual suspicions were first animated by perceptions of the other country and it's intentions presumably fueled by its dominant national character and ideology. The United States saw in the Soviet Union evidence of its communist ideology and its drive for world revolution in its conduct and the United and the Soviet Union saw in the American conduct of its behavior, evidence of hypocrisy and capitalist imperi, imperialism in his actions. And so both had a lens to interpret these, these events as aggressive. Right? Concretely, the United States began to see equivalences, equality, you know, between Hitler, its chief adversary during World War II and Stalin, its emerging adversary in the Cold War. And they saw this in the ruthless pact between the two leaders, Hitler and Stalin to divide up Eastern Europe, between them and the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact. Moreover, shortly after the Yalta conference, Roosevelt began to decry what he saw as broken promises by the Soviets regarding the sovereignty of these European states occupied by Soviet troops and freeing, and the holding of free and fair elections there. Finally, unlike the US which brought its military home after the war, the Soviet Union kept its military in Europe to maintain pressure on each European government. For the Soviet's part, it had historical resentments against the capitalist West, which it saw as undifferentiated from the US and Europe. For previous invasions against it's territory by Nazi Germany and Napoleon before that. The US and Western powers intervened briefly during the Russian civil war, during its revolution on the sides of the whites against the Red Army in order to strangle the Russian Revolution in its cradle, which was another source of mistrust. And more recently, in this time period, it's suspected, Joseph Stalin suspected in particular that the delay in opening a second front in World War II to take pressure off of the Eastern front was intentional to weaken both Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union, which was an ally at the time of the United States. Now the third role and the thir, third factor and I'll just touch on this briefly and then we'll stop is the role of individuals. And here, let me note two points. First, Stalin's paranoia. His Cold War historian John Lewis Gaddis, his fa he put much of the blame on the origins of the Cold War on Joseph Stalin and his extreme insecurity and paranoia. According to Gaddis, Stalin had been fighting Cold Wars with real and imagined enemies his whole life. And the Cold War with the United States was just another stage in those battles. Given his personality, there was nothing the US could have done to calm his auto, insecurities. As a, as the quote there on the slide suggests. On the other side of the Leger was Harry S. Truman who's, and his anti-communism, which was much stronger than FDR's and can be seen by the nice little quote there regarding the second front issue and Stalin was so upset about. So to recap, World War II ended and set up a certain conditions that made the Cold War more likely between the US and the Soviet Union for these three reasons. 