 This module begins our historical section of the course. The prior modules provided an introduction to the making of foreign policy in the United States. We defined foreign policy, identified the ideological range of grand strategy debates in American history and then examined how domestic institutions, like elections and the separation of power between the executive and legislative branches, and domestic society interact to influence American foreign policy. Now we turn to a brief survey of important events in the history of American foreign policy. This overview is not meant to be exhaustive. We are not getting deep into the historical details to understand things like the Monroe Doctrine, or the decision to join World War I in 1917. While we want you to be aware of important events that helped to shape America's emergence as the strongest military and political power in the world after World War II, we also want you to see how these windows in American history illustrate important concepts and themes that we are in the process of presenting and reinforcing throughout this course. Consequently, many of these mini sessions will be targeted around at least one of the big questions that were presented in the introductory module. So in this module, we will begin with the American Revolution and end with the Monroe Doctrine. It includes 5 lecture segments. The first examines how wars in Europe helped to spur pressures for independence in the colonies. The second looks at how the threat of war shaped internal institutional developments in the United States, particularly the decision to create a stronger central government than the one that existed through the Articles of Confederation. The third segment examines the connections between the French and American Revolutions, and the fourth segment examines how the wars associated with the French Revolution and Napoleon's bid for French hegemony in Europe shaped the United States through the Louisiana Purchase and the War of 1812. Note the common theme across these first 4 segments. They all examine how the external pressures associated with European war helped to shape the creation of the United States, including its territorial boundaries, its internal institutions, and even the collective identity of its citizens. Finally, the fifth segment examines the American effort to limit European political influence from North and South America through the Monroe Doctrine. 