 Now let's turn to the first of these units that's designed to understand how external events namely war in Europe help to give rise to the movement for independence in the American colonies. So, I don't wanna make any presumption about how you learned about American in, independence. But I was taught about it as a struggle between two sets of actors, the colonists and the British government. I remember the call for no taxation without representation, and my high school history text emphasized the virtues of the founding fathers, and their desire for both self-governance. In other words, democracy and freedom from an oppressive colonial system. On one level, this is a story, at least how it was presented to me, about an internal struggle over where political authority and power should rest. And this is something that has repeatedly occurred throughout history. Ukrainians are trying to reinforce right now the political independence they achieved from Russia when the Soviet Union collapsed. And they're trying to do this by moving closer to the European Union. Moscow is trying to re-establish some form of sphere, or to re-establish some form of the prior sphere of influence that they held over at least part of Ukraine. In both these cases though, that of Ukrainian and American independence, we can not understand, and this is important, we can not understand the conflict and how it has evolved or is evolving solely in terms of an internal struggle for independence between two sets of actors. Instead, involvement by foreign actors, like France in the 18th century, and the European, Russia and the United states more recently in the Ukraine, have played a huge role in setting the conditions associated with statehood and independence for both the United States and Ukraine. So now what I wanna do is talk about these external pressures and give you some examples in the context of the case of American independence. So I want you to think about the discussion that takes place in the next 20 minutes or so. In terms of a couple of big questions. The first is one we've talked a lot about. Namely, how do developments in the international system, or global politics, shape the construction of what we now know as the United States? The emergence of the United States in the last quarter of the 18th century, was shaped significantly by a series of world wars that had started in Europe. There on the slide. This is just a repeat, that we gave on the first day of class. And what we want to think about here is how does war make the statement. This is what I'm gonna get to in a second. The Seven Years War, also known as the French and Indian War, took place from 1756 to 1763. It was a complicated war in Europe that involved many of the large states there. There were essentially two big lines of conflict. That in which the British fought a war with France and Spain over access to commerce and colonies. And another in which Prussia fought most of the continent, particularly Austria, over which state would rule German speaking peoples in central Europe. For our purposes, the most important consequence of, of this war was a dramatic British victory over the French and the Spanish in North America. The British secured significant new territorial possessions in in North America, including French Canada. Now, the long war and the territorial gains created two new big political challenges for the British government. On the one hand, they did what most big powers do when fighting long wars. They deferred the real economic cost of war by borrowing money to fund current military expenditures. The total cost of this war was about 137 million Pounds. The annual interest payments on just that war debt was 5 million Pounds, which was over 60%, just the interest, which was over 60% of the ordinary peacetime budget of the British government. To give you some sense of how big this expenditure was, how big this loan was, and the cost of servicing it. Let's compare it slightly to the current state of American finances. The US government will spend about $3.7 trillion this year. If it spent 60% of that total for interest on, for interest on the last war, that would imply interest payments. Of about 225, or sorry, $2.25 trillion. At current interest rates of about 2.6%, that would be like the US borrowed about $88 trillion to pay for its last wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. As a sidebar, I think the total bills for these wars was about $1 trillion. So we're talking about 1% of the cost. That effectively, the real costs that the British were paying in the middle of 18th century. Now, obviously government spending was much, much smaller back then and largely devoted to national defense, which makes this comparison less meaningful. But the takeaway point here is that this war was incredibly expensive for the British and they needed to find some way to pay for it. So on top of this significant fiscal burden associated with liquidating the war debt, the British faced a second problem from the war that aggravated these budget troubles. This problem stem, stemmed from its victory. The British now had more territory and longer frontiers to defend in North America. They decided that they needed to increase permanently the number of troops in North America to about 10,000 which was double the number of troops that had been there before the war. So together you can see how the war and the war settlement that gave more territory to the British created a serious demand for new revenues for the British government. I'm sure you can guess where they turned. To the rapidly growing colonies in North America. The population of the colonies had doubled from one to two million between 1750 and 1770. By 1770 the colonies had one-fifth of the British and Irish populations combined. Moreover, colonists were rapidly spreading out in North America in search of land thereby helping to increase conflict with native Americans and increasing the need for security on the frontiers. The colonies also had tremendous economic value to Great Britain. Almost one-half of English shipping was involved with trade with North America. Imports and exports had doubled in the 20 years before the end of the Seven Years War. The colonies were also heavily in debt to English and Scottish banks. So this economic environment, this interdependence, motivated a series of reforms, many of which were designed to raise new revenues derived from the colonies after 1763. So you're probably familiar with many of these acts. If not, don't worry about memorizing them, but I just want to briefly list them. So the Sugar Act of 1764 which imposed new taxes on cloth, sugar, coffee and molasses that were imported into the colonies and it also heightened the rigidity of how these taxes were collected. The Stamp Act of 1765 imposed taxes on legal documents and newspapers. The Townsend Act of 1767 imposed new taxes on glass, paint, paper and tea imported into the colonies. And then the tea act of 1773 granted the East India Company a monopoly on the tea trade. So these efforts to secure new revenues for the British government, in turn provoked a sharp backlash from the colonists and helped to incentivize local political resistance in the colonies which included commercial embargoes of British products, decisions by local officials not to enforce these new tax laws. And the recreation of local legislative bodies after they had been disbanded by the British. And here you can think of the calls, the famous ones we've heard about, of no taxation without representation. So given the local resistance to these new taxes, the British government opted to begin to circumvent local authority. For example, the Coercive Acts of 1774 allowed the governor of Massachusetts, who was selected by the British government, to appoint representatives in the Massachusetts legislature. So here again, bypassing local rule. So more broadly you can see how the fiscal needs of the British government to pay for the war against France had led to the imposition of internal reforms in the colonies. That in turn provoked resistance to their implementation and calls for independence. In short, the shock of war emanating from the broader international system, was fundamentally altering the basic political relationship between Great Britain it's colonies in North America. The colonies though, faced a dilemma in this bid for independence. Great Britain was arguably the strongest power in the world. It definitely had the strongest Navy, which granted them the capacity to choke off the American economy and move troops from Europe to North America. There was a gross imbalance in the size of the British and colonists armies. In 1778 Great Britain had 50,000 troops stationed in North America. And it added about 30,000 German mercenaries during the course of the war for independence. The first continental army had slightly over 5,000 troops and was augmented by various state militias. In short, the colonists needed external help to achieve military victory. And here we get France. So the colonists turned to France which had been, and they were willing to provide this assistance because they were the traditional rival of Great Britain. The colonist needed capital to pay for the war, war material to fight the war, and French advisers that could both train and help fight with American soldiers. The French would eventually provide all of this aid. It is important to realize though how these foreign policy needs helped to influence the decision to declare independence from Great Britain. You can think about the Declaration of Independence as an irrevocable signal or commitment. Not just to domestic actors, but to foreign actors, as well. So the colonists are making this irrevocable signal, which was a decision basically to burn the bridge that might have proved capable of generating a compromise agreement back with the British. They're signaling the French were not going back. It made compromise difficult with the British, but it also helped to convince the French that the colonists were worthy of support. The French government had worried that its encouraged, it, en, sorry, encouragement of the revolt in North America could prompt a new war with the British. So if such a conflict then pushed the colonists back into the arms of the British; ie the colonists reached a separate peace with the British, then the British would then again have access to the resources of North America to fight a long war, another one against the, against the French. So the French needed to be convinced that the colonists were committed to separation from Great Britain and the Declaration of Independence, something we cite as critical to protection of individual freedom and setting up the United States, this was also a foreign policy document. It was designed to make that promise to France to separate from Brit, Brit, Great Britain credible. The next critical stage though in this tightening relationship between France and the colonies occurred with the conclusion of an alliance between the two of them. Given new impetus by the military victory at Saratoga, that helped prevent the British from closing off New England from the rest of the continent, the colonists constructed a wide ranging deal with the French, alliance agreement, in 1778. It committed the French to fight until the colonies had achieved independence. Neither party would agree to a separate peace with the British, and each party would get to preserve their possessions in North America. And the French would gain British possessions in the lucrative West Indies. The French then extended this alliance, by drawing Spain in to the war against Great Britain, by promising them support to take Gibraltar. Moreover, Russia constructed an armed neutrality pact with a series of other European nations, that helped to offset the British naval advantage. This pact was designed to protect neutral shipping and trade. In short, the colonists bid for independence had provoked a global coalition against the British. Most importantly, this global coalition and the physical challenges associated with conquering a vast territory then play significant role in accounting for American military victory and the favorable territorial settlement that was granted by the British to the United States. The British faced an opposition that will spread-out and decentralized. It was difficult to secure traditional military victories in which large armies defeated each other because General Washington had avoided such confrontations, instead the colonist fought guerilla campaigns that interrupted the British army's supply lines. The British opted for peace to avoid the continuing costs of war and to ensure that a European Grand Coalition couldn't threaten the British Islands. The British even gave the colonists a more favorable settlement than either the French or the Spanish were willing to grant. They recognized independence. American territory to the west of Mississippi and American territory up to Canada. Now before moving on to the next section, I want you to take away one central component to this story as a means of summary. European politics and war, particularly the long Anglo-French rivalry there. Played a central role in the emergence of the United States as an independent country. The United States was born out of the larger conflict that emerged in international politics. 