 The Articles of Confederation is a vital part of American foreign policy well vital part of American history and this will make us, this discussion will allow us to make two crucial points. First institutions, how the United States structures its government. A matter in shaping the conduct of foreign policy. We made this point at the beginning of class and going through both Articles of Confederation and the Constitution will help us to make this point from the very beginning of American history. In this case, the Articles of Confederation produce they loose union among the states, and contributed to the weakness, international weakness of the United States relative to Europe. And this heightened fears that this weakness might precipitate another European intervention potentially sparked by international conflict between the various states within this emerging United States of America. Now secondly these fears of external security threats again played a critical role in the development of the institutions of the United States. It provided a powerful tool, this threat of external intervention was a powerful incentive to generate the national consensus necessary to ratify the Constitution. In short, this brief period of American history after the end of the the Revolutionary War, through the ratification of the Constitution. That brief period illustrates this reciprocal role between war, or the threat of war, and the development of internal institutions that really define the United States. Now, let's talk about the articles themselves. Negotiations over some agreement that could bind the states together began in 1777 and culminated in 1781 with the Articles of Confederation. Congress was granted the authority to control diplomacy, to requisition money from the states, to build an army, and to try to settle any disputes among the states. However, the Articles of Confederation did not possess provide Congress with much authority beyond that, all right. As stated in Article 2 of the articles any authority not explicitly granted to the central government lay with the states. So this was a very decentralized system. In many ways, the Articles of Confederation is this agreement acted as an alliance arrangement among the states. State loyalties still triumphed what we are, sort or trumped what we would think of as national loyalties today, and so it was more important to be a Virginian, or a New Yorker a member of those two state identities, than an American, at this time. So, the articles did abolish internal tariffs between the states and effectively created a common market. Each state was, however each state was free to conduct its own commercial policy relative to other governments and to set its own tax structure. And so this decentralization was going to pose some problems. The Articles of Confederation left the union, this union of states, relative, weak, relative to European states that were much more centralized, and they were weak on multiple grounds. And as a consequence, it rendered this new nation that was just coming out of the Revolutionary War vulnerable to both disillusion, breaking apart by itself, or external attacked from stronger European states. This logic can been seen in 25 of the first 36 Articles of the Federalists papers, which highlighted national security problems associated with the Articles of Confederation. For example, John Jay in Article 4, warned of the dangers associated with internal weakness. If the states retain significant autonomy, would they come to the defense of other states that were threatened by foreign invasion? Jay worried that the states that weren't immediate targets of any external intervention might be tempted instead to form some you, some sort of neutrality pact with an external aggressor. Moreover, the federalists who are arguing that there needed to be a change in the Articles of Confederation and a more, and a stronger centralized government for this new nation. They argued that European War should be taken as a constant or a given in international life. The United Stated would then regularly be in danger of being drawn into these conflicts. So, unless a strong central government had the capacity to keep states in line, individual states within the union in line, a few states might entangle the larger union into an unwanted war because they're acting on their own. On another matter, the absence of a common tariff policy relative to other governments effectively undermined the leverage possessed by the rapidly growing economy relative to other countries. The young country, United States, needed commerce to thrive economically but neither France nor Britain were very willing to oblige these goals in the 1780s. And instead, they opposed significant tariff hurdles to trade. Both countries saw the virtues of economic and political weakness for their own interests in North America. They could play the states off each other when constructing trade agreements. Moreover, weakness would ensure that another rival in global politics sitting on vast natural resources would not emerge. They were afraid of a strong American nation, all right? And they were trying to prevent that. Consequently, within the United States the Federalists, argued that a strong central government was necessary to enforce a common commercial policy capable of securing better trade terms with Europe. So if you put this all together in sum, these foreign policy concerns among others helped to shape the domestic internal politics associated with moving from the articles of confederation in that decentralized system to the ratification of the Constitution that gave the federal government significantly more power than it possessed under the Articles of Confederation. These concerns with foreign threats, they helped to shift the debate also over ratification from local distributional issues, like access to western lands and the portioning political power among the states of very different sizes and wealth, to external concerns in which common interest that bound the states together. Such as the need to ensure the fledgling nation's security from European threats. We're more likely to prevail and facilitate the passage of the Constitution, right? And so, once again the, the broad conclusion here from past discussion of the Revolutionary War to the Articles of Confederation and the ultimate ratification of a more centralized system under the Constitution. All has a, a one line here, one theme, and that is that we usually look at all of this history as domestic, right? That we built a nation based on principles of. Liberty, life and the pursuit of happiness and, and these founding fathers were doing this for all of these values and all of these reasons of building up this country from the ground up. But what we're trying to persuade you of is the very vital international role that played into all of these decisions. From the Revolutionary War, through to the Constitution, that international politics really had a hand in shaping the, emergence of the American republic. 