 In this final section on the early years of the American Republic I want to briefly identify some common paths to revolution in both the United States and France. These connections are important because as you remember from our first lecture on grand strategy. They provide important context for the establishment of isolationism as a critical or guiding principle for American foreign policy until, really, World War II. So what helped to activate the French Revolution? Just as a victory in the Seven Years War prompted a fiscal challenge to the British government,. But then push them to make significant internal political changes within the colonies, which then prompted a revolt in the colonies. The French victory in the war for American independence, created a similar challenge for the French at home. It strained French finances. Because of the political difficulties associated with raising new taxes, the, the French, like the British, like the United States in 2003, opted to fund the war through loans instead. The French government then tried to institute a series of fiscal reforms including land taxes and the elimination of internal customs duties in 1786 to secure new revenues, to guarantee new borrowing. But the French government could not get local governing units to approve these changes. The French Treasury lost the capacity to borrow money in August of 1788. Think here about the parallel with contemporary Greece. The French treasury looses the capacity to borrow in August of 1788 which then precipitated the king to call a meeting of the estates general. This marked the beginning of the end for the French king as he effectively appointed a legislative rival for political power just as his authority was collapsing. Now I don't wanna go into any more details of the French Revolution, but I want to point out some important, common attributes between these two wars and the political consequences that follow. The cost of war even when victorious, can tremendously strain existing political arrangements within states. Moreover then, this domestic revolution in France upends European politics for the next 25 years, as it activa, activates widespread, total war that engulfs the continent. So take a step back, we have war 1756-1763, you get the American Revolution, and then you get the war that's part of the American Revolution prompt revolut, then prompt domestic revolution in France. International and domestic politics are linked. So now why is this European war that ends with Napoleon's attempt to conquer all of Europe important for the United States. This period essentially of about 23 to 25 years of European war helps to prompt American withdrawal from European politics. And we talked about this in the third lecture. Washington's farewell address warns of the dangers associated with getting drawn into war in Europe. He didn't know whether the United States could survive given that the two dominant parties at the time were aligning with different foreign governments. Consequently, Washington constructed what was later described as an isolationist grand strategy. So now let's go on and grab a quote from this farewell address. The Great rule of conduct for us, in regard to foreign Nations is to have with them as little pone, political connection as possible. So far as we have already formed engagements. Let them be fulfilled with perfect good faith. Here let us stop, it would be unwise to implicate ourselves in the vicissitudes of Europe's politics or in the ordinary combinations and collisions of our friendships or enmities. Our detached and distant situation invites and enables us to pursue a different course. Why forego the advantages of so peculiar a situation? Why, by interweaving our destiny with that of any part of Europe, entangle our peace and prosperity in the toils of European ambition, rivalship, interest, humor, or caprice. It is our true police to steer clear of permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world. And it's this statement that provides really the foundation for American foreign policy and helps to animate consistent interests supporting isolationism in the United States for really the next 150 years. 