 In this brief segment, we want to talk about the role played by foreign policy in the development of the United States during the presidencies of Jefferson and Madison. It focuses on two key events. The Louisiana Purchase in 1803 and the War of 1812. Before proceeding into this discussion, let me emphasize the continuing importance of a theme that has run through this module and that we presented at the very outset of this course. The pressures associated with war in Europe played a central in the development of the United States during its first four decades. Napoleon would sell Louisiana to the United States in 1803 to secure additional revenue for the pending resumption of his war against Great Britain and Jefferson's inability to preserve commercial access to both coalitions in the subsequent Napoleonic Wars would eventually put the United States on a collision course with Britain and war in 1812. Democratic Republican foreign policy under Jefferson initially followed the vision presented by Washington in his farewell address. Jefferson sought to avoid entanglements in the wars of the French Revolution currently underway in Europe so that the United States could consolidate itself as a new nation state. Jefferson's grand strategy was oriented around three goals, our national interests. First, contrary to the federalist vision of Hamilton, he wanted to limit the power of the federal government relative to states. The political autonomy of individual states could be protected by weakening the federal bureaucracy including the army and relying on state militias for national defense. Moreover, the risks of such a shift in national security strategy could be offset by remaining outside of the European conflict. A peaceful foreign policy would reinforce the devolution of political authority from Washington D.C. to the individual states. Second, the American economy could flourish with commercial expansion oriented around agricultural production. The United States had a national interest in promoting trade and ensuring market access to Europe. The American economy had already prospered significantly by trading with both coalitions in the wars of the French Revolution. This put a premium on preserving neutrality rights and America's neutral status. If the United State tilted to either side in the conflict, it would lose market access to the other. Third, Jefferson's desire to emphasize agricultural production helped stimulate pressure for territorial expansion. The United States needed more land for settlers to farm and it needed access to European markets so that its surplus production could be exported. Under Jefferson and Madison, the United States would push to incorporate Louisiana and all of its associated territory to the west, and Florida, and Canada. While consistent with Jefferson's vision, the purchase of Louisiana in 1803 was facilitated by events in Europe and the Caribbean outside of the control of the United States. The Louisiana territory had been granted to Spain as part of France's defeat in the 7 Years War in 1763. Over the next forty years, American settlers would flood into New Orleans and help change local politics there. These settlers sought incorporation into the United States and encouraged expansionist visions in Washington D.C. Spain returned New Orleans to France in 1800 as part of the larger set of negotiations accompanying war in Europe. Napoleon's strategy though for securing access to New Orleans and the Louisiana Territory rested on consolidating French control of present-day Haiti. By 1802, the colony was in open revolt and the French suffered losses of more than 20,000 troops attempting to maintain its hold there. France's ability to hold New Orleans against the opposition of American settlers would be dramatically weakened if it could not reliably resupply its troops there through Haiti. The prospect of a resumed war against Great Britain cemented Napoleon's strategic calculations. The defense of Louisiana would be too costly amidst war in Europe, revolt in Haiti, Jefferson's threats to ally with Britain, and Jefferson's newly tacit support for the revolt in Haiti. Consequently, Napoleon translated his geopolitical weakness into financial again. The proceeds of the sale of Louisiana could be used to finance his war against the British. Now, even though war in Europe had created a geo-strategic opportunity for Jefferson relative to Louisiana, it would eventually prompt a national crisis, dragging the United States into war with the British in 1812 while risking dissolution through secession in the United States. The conflict with the British can ultimately be traced to commercial rights and the larger war in Europe. When the European war resumed in 1803, both sides sought to limit American commercial access to the other coalition. During the first phase of the war in the 1790's, American merchants had grown wealthy through something called the carry-trade. They served as middlemen moving goods from French and Spanish colonies to American ports and then re-exporting those goods to Europe despite British naval control of the Atlantic and an embargo of all trade into continental Europe. While the British allowed this to happen in the first phase of the European war through 1802, they began to choke off this trade after 1803. Jefferson sought to preserve this enormously beneficial carry-trade. It comprised two-thirds of all American exports and helped to limit British influence over the American economy by offsetting a huge trade deficit that the United States possessed relative to Great Britain. Now Britain enforced this change in policy by preventing American merchant ships from reaching Europe and conscripting any sailors on those ships that they felt had deserted the Royal Navy. These policies provoked an anti-British backlash in the United States. Jefferson closed American ports to British naval ships in 1807 and embargoed all US trade with both Britain and France. He sought to impose pain on the British economy by depriving it of access to American goods and by depriving it of access to American markets. He also felt that the strategy of economic withdrawal could keep the United States out of war in Europe. This decision to separate the American economy from those in Europe would spark a domestic political crisis in the United States. Jefferson could not enforce the embargo, particularly as merchants sought to evade it by moving goods through Canada. Tightened border restrictions required new laws that were cast as restricting civil liberties. Federalist interests in New England began fomenting open discussions of secession. The economic pain associated with the embargo would also stimulate pressure for war against the British inside of the United States. The United States could seize on Britain's strategic focus on the war in Europe and conquer both Canada and Florida. The conquest of Canada would also strengthen the embargo and eliminate the British ability to resupply its colonies in the Caribbean through Canada. In short, the United States could weaken the British in the Western hemisphere more broadly with a successful military challenge. Such interests led Congress to support a war resolution against Britain in the summer of 1812. Now the war did not proceed well for the United States. Neglect of the military had left it weak relative to the British. Governors varied in their willingness to deploy state militias outside of their states. And the Federalists used the lack of military successes to flame the talk of secession again in New England. The British and the Americans effectively fought to withdraw in the first two years of the war. Again though, developments in Europe shaped the war's outcome and the fate of the United States. Napoleon's abdication in April of 1814 opened peace talks in Europe and hardened Britain's position at the negotiating table with the United States. The prospect of a European peace freed the British to shift their military focus to North America and reposition troops from Europe to the American theater. Consequently, the British demanded a vast neutral space in the Northwestern Territories which are present day Ohio and Michigan as a condition for peace in the summer of 1814. However, when it looked like the peace talks in Vienna would break down later that year, the British abandon their new territorial claims and opted for a peace that would restore the status quo that had existed before 1812 in North America. The British and Americans signed the Ghent peace treaty on Christmas Eve in 1814. As a means of conclusion, I just want to come back with a theme that started this segment. European war helped consolidate the American state and its domestic institutions. Victory against the British strengthened national unity and quashed the talk of secession in New England. Moreover, it undermined the long-term viability of the Federalist Party. Victory also allowed the United States to consolidate its hold over the Northwest Territories relative to Native Americans as they were deprived of European allies. After 1814, Native Americans fought against western expansion on their own. This dramatically shifted the military balance in favor of the government and effectively facilitated military conquest all the way to the Pacific throughout the remainder of the 19th century. 