 Let's fast-forward a bit in our historical overview, then, to December 2nd, 1823 and the seventh State of the Union Address of President James Monroe in his second term. In his speech to Congress, President Monroe issues what would later be called the Monroe Doctrine, which is another Watershed event in US foreign policy in, in the immersion years of this new republic. Now, in order to understand the meaning and significance of the Monroe Doctrine. I'm going to start with the foreign policy thinking of Monroe's Secretary of State, John Quincy Adams who was, according to many historians, one of the most successful Secretary's of State in US history. He's also the son of John Adams, and the sixth president of the United States. John Quincy Adams foreign policy thinking combined two important strains that were very difficult to reconcile with each other. Adams was a strong advocate of American expansion. Well before it was clear that the United States would dominate the land mass now known as con, the continental United States you know all of the northern half of. North America. Adams was a very religious man. And he saw the expansion of the US as part of God's plan. A sort of precursor to manifest destiny, which we will cover in the next lecture. At the same time as he had this strain of expansionism in his foreign policy thinking. John Quincy Adams also followed in the tradition of George Washington. And he was careful not to involve America in foreign adventures that would be hard to extract the country from. I give you a famous quote from Adams, who stated that the United States would be quote, the well-wisher to the freedom and independence of all, but the champion and vindicator only of her own. This means that for John Quincey Adams this is still a very young nation and needed to stay in its lane, so to speak, when it comes to trying to influence and shape the world around it. Even though he firmly believed in the destiny of the United States as eventually becoming a continental power. He was careful not to over-commit American resources and prestige to even worthy causes such as national independence and democracy for other countries. Now, why do I bring this up about John Quincy Adams? We should understand the Monroe Doctrine. As walking that fine line between Adam's assertiveness in this expansion strain of his thinking and his carefulness in following the tradition of Washington of not getting beyond our capacity in, in getting intertwined with European battles. Now let me explicitly lay out the main principles of the Monroe doctrine, because it has to the day had a large imprint on US foreign policy. First, and the point usually highlighted as the essence of the Monroe Doctrine. President Monroe declared the Western Hemisphere was now closed to new or renewed European colonization and that it was being closed by the United States. Now, this was a bold statement of assertiveness from a relatively new nation. However, the speech also offered caveats that soften this message of stay out of our area, right? The US, in the Monroe Doctrine, was differentiating between newly independent states and continuing colonies. So it was stating hands off the former newly independent states, but you can basically keep the latter continuing colonies. Now this sort of fine line in, in the Monroe Doctrine, which is usually treated as, you know, we have a sphere of influence here in the Western Hemisphere hands off Europe stay over there. This fine line shows a conservative side of Adams, who was the person who crafted this Monroe Doctrine, and his unwillingness to try to dislodge. Or drive out a European power from the Western Hemisphere since the United States really did not have the fire power to do that. Finally, there is a broader dual message in this address, in this, in the Monroe Doctrine. Monroe declares a sphere of influence for the United States over Latin America. That's, that's true. However in the speech he also notes that the United States was going to stay out of European wars and would not even disturb the existing colonies in Latin America. So the US was raising its claims and assertions in foreign policy. While at the same time, curbing and limiting its ambitions and proclaiming it only wanted extra influence in its area within the Western Hemisphere. One final note about the Monroe Doctrine here. So why did the United States issue this statement of its intentions within the western hemisphere at this particular time. Why in the early part of the 19th century, in 1823? Remember, the United States in 1823 was still a relatively young country and was much weaker militarily than the strongest European states such as Great Britain. So it really had no business making this bold declaration about its primacy within the Western Hemisphere. Mostly this move at this time was driven by external developments. Once again, returning to that theme of how external developments effect internal decision making. It was a clear case, the Monroe Doctrine, of the world helping to shape US foreign policy, as we have been noting in this lecture. First, so, so what was happening in the world that prompted this declaration. First, independent, independence movements within Latin America, created newly independent states to the south of the United States that presented opportunities and potential risks that the United States felt compelled to react to. And, so, the United States didn't wake up one day and say, let's issue a declaration for control or, or a sphere of influence in Latin America. Instead developments within Latin America prompted this reaction. So whether Latin American states would be stable neighbors or ones that invited foreign melon, meddling from stronger European states would have a huge impact on American security. And so the United States had to do something and say something and figure out a policy on how to react to these newly emergent states in Latin America. Secondly, there were also developments in Europe. Mainly the end of the Napoleonic Wars that created threats and opportunities for the United States. The French Revolution and it's aftermath created havoc in Europe, and conservative non democratic monarchies like Russia under the Czar saw democratic revolutions like the American Revolution. And, the independence movements in Latin America that were happening right at this time as threats to the old order. And so there were these conservative states within Europe that were looking around the world trying to see what would be the next threat, and see potential ones in the Western Hemisphere. After Napoleon was defeated, their merge coalitions of strong European states, such as, The Holy Alliance, so called between Russia, Prussia and Austria that were dedicated to supporting monarchies against the instability of democracies spread. This development in Europe created fear. That these and other European powers would try to stamp out the instability of democracy even in the western hemisphere. However, these same developments presented an opportunity for assertiveness by the United States because there emerged a balance of power between rival European powers. That prevented any one single country from being dominant in Europe and more broadly. That balance of power provided an opening for the United States to insert itself in the Western Hemisphere. And the third external factor, besides the developments within Latin America and these independence movements, and the end of the Napoleonic War and the balance of power that was emerging in Europe. The third main factor was the role of Great Britain. Great Britain supported the Monroe Doctrine. Because it was in Great Britain's commercial and political interest to keep other European powers especially Spain out of the Western Hemisphere. This was an essen, this was essential because the American military was too weak to actually enforce the Monroe Doctrine. And so it stated it, but it really couldn't walk the walk, let's say, and it couldn't keep European powers out of Latin America. Instead, the enforcer of the Monroe Doctrine was actually the powerful British Navy that did so in the early years right after the Monroe Doctrine was declared. So let me give one last point here. And we end with a few words about the lasting importance of the Monroe Doctrine. Why do we care 200 years later virtually? Yeah, yeah. Virtually, right? Mister, whatever. >> >> First, it was a landmark development because it marked a key point where the US entered the world stage and asserted it's interests. But it is also important because it established some precedence that would affect US foreign policy far into the future. It established some key concepts and key ideals of the US foreign policy. For example it established the idea that the US had a special role in its own backyard and this claim what we might call a special sphere of influence in Latin America. Not only did the Monroe Doctrine claim a sphere of influence for the US and Latin America it also acknowledged that European powers had there own sphere of influence in Europe and the US promised to stay out of their business. This concept of spheres of influence in which great powers claim the right to intervene in their neighbor's affairs will arise again in US foreign policy. Usually the US does not support such claims when they are made by other countries. Russia for example, in making such a claim in Ukraine right now comes to mind immediately. Now another key element of the Monroe Doctrine was that it was based on higher ideals such as anti-colonialism and even democracy promotion. It was one of the first instances of the US hinting that it would help protect and promote democracy around the world, with it's offer to help protect newly independent Latin American states against European meddling. Finally, the Monroe Doctrine also arguably, sowed the seeds of American imperialism. Under future presidents, Theodore Roosevelt in particular, the US would use the Monroe Doctrine to meddle in Latin America itself. Indeed Teddy Roosevelt issued what would be known as the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine in his State of the Union Address in 1904. It claimed that the US would use international police power and intervene militarily to stop unrest and instability in Latin American states. This corollary would establish a precedent for US meddling, according to some, in Latin America to protect its interests. Critics claim the US simply replaced European powers as the imperial agent in the region. 