 >> In the News ♪ Alright, today we want to begin by briefly discussing the fireworks from the last Republican Presidential debate on Saturday. And you should think about this conversation as being oriented around the following question "how does war, principally the war in Iraq in 2003, change domestic politics in the United States?" Now the tone and the back and forth of the debate was obviously harsh. There is a growing concern within the Republican Party that the campaign itself could be destroying the Republican Party. For example, notable Republican pollster, Frank Luntz tweeted the following during the debate on Saturday. I just want to give you some of these quotes. "For the first time ever, a GOP debate audience booed more than cheered. This isn't just insane, this is suicidal. This is pathetic." Unquote. Second quote.. "There is no way the Republicans won any independent votes away from the Democrats after the last GOP debate." Unquote. And also on his twitter feed, he tweeted a picture of Russel Crowe from the Gladiator after he had destroyed everyone in the gladiator pit with the captions, "Are you not entertained?" So it's clear that there is a larger process of pandering going on in the Republican Party and the concern is no matter who that they nominate in November they are going to be in a much worse position to take on the Democrats, but part of this conversation is well, what happens to the Republicans -- in case they lose, what happens afterwards? Can the party regroup and pull together? So Rob and I want to talk about this growing conflicts within the Republicans and as a manifestation of a much deeper political process in the United States that bears on something that we've been talking about since the first day of class. Namely, war changes domestic politics in the United States. In this case, I think the war in Iraq, first launched in 2003, is responsible for a deepening split within the Republican Party. So now, we are going to watch clip from the debate, and that'll give you some sense of this split, and after we talk about the clip we are going to trace the split back to 2005 and 2006. So why don't we watch this clip? >> Bush will campaign in South Carolina for his brother, and as you said tonight and as you've often said, the Iraq War and your opposition to it is a sign of your good judgement. In 2008 in an interview with Wolfe Blitzer talking about President George W. Bush's conduct with the war, you said you were surprised that the Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi didn't try to impeach him. You said, "Which personally I think would have been a wonderful thing" When you were asked what you meant by that, you said, "for the war." "For the war, he lied. He got us into the war with lies." Do you still think that President Bush should have been impeached? >> First of all I have to say, as a business man I get along with everybody, I have business all over the world. [Crowd Booing] I know so many of the people in the audience, and by the way, I'm a self-funder. I don't have -- I have my wife and I have my son, that's all I have this. [Crowd Cheering] So let me just tell you, I get along with everybody, which is my obligation to my company, and myself, et cetera. Obviously the war in Iraq was a big fat mistake. Alright. Now you can take it any way you want and it took Jeb -- Jeb Bush if you remember at the beginning of his announcement, when he announced for Presidency took him five days, he went back. 'It was a mistake. It wasn't a mistake' It took him five days before his people told him what to say, and he ultimately said, "it was a mistake.' The war in Iraq -- we spent 2 trillion dollars, thousands of lives -- we don't even have it. Iran is taking over Iraq with the second largest oil reserves in the world. Obviously it was a mistake. George Bush made a mistake. We can make mistakes but that one was a beauty. We should have never been in Iraq. We have de-stabilized the Middle East. >> So you still think he should be impeached. >> I think its my turn. >> You do whatever you want, you call it whatever you want. I want to tell you that they lied, and they said there were weapons of mass destruction -- there weren't none -- and they knew there were none. There were no weapons of mass destruction. [Crowd boos] >> When a member on the stage's brother gets attacked the brother gets to respond. >> I've -- do I get to do it five or six times -- So here's the deal. I'm sick and tired of Barack Obama blaming my brother for all of the problems that he's had. [Crowd cheers] And frankly, I could care less about the insults that Donald Trump gives to me. It's blood sport for him. He enjoys it and I'm glad he's happy about it. [Cross talk] I am sick and tired of him going after my family. My dad is the greatest man alive in my mind, while Donald Trump was building a reality TV show, my brother was building a security apparatus to keep us safe. And I'm proud of what he did. [crowd cheers] [ding] [Cross talk] [crowd booing] He's had the gall to go after my mother. I won the lottery when I was born 63 years ago, looked up and saw my mom. My mom is the strongest woman I know. This is not about my family, or his family. This about the South Carolina families that need someone to be a commander in chief that can lead. And I'm that person. >> So I think you can see why Luntz is so concerned about the consequences of this campaign on the Republican's electoral prospects in November. I think it's important to note though that this split goes back further, at least a decade, and it's not just about the personality differences between Trump and Jeb. and it's not just centered on the growing cult of personality around Donald Trump. Instead this split which reflects an intense political conflict between two strong factions within the Republican Party, dates back at least to the George W. Bush administration and the war it waged in Iraq. So let's talk about this question now. How does war in Iraq change domestic politics in the United States. This first thing to realize is that war played a big role in the rise of the Democratic party in both 2006 and in 2008. The Democrats do very well in the mid-term elections in 2006. President Bush then fires Rumsfeld the day after the November 2006 elections and he says this is a manifestation of the democratic process. I hear you, we're going to be making changes. Now the war in 2006 is not going well. President Bush has just initiated over the summer, the surge which is bolstering up the number of American troops on the ground in Iraq and that helped to turn the tide in Iraq. At least through 2009 or so. But in 2006 the war is not going well. Al' Qaeda in Iraq, the predecessor to ISIS, has successfully launched a civil war between Shia and Sunni that has kept the United States bogged down there repeatedly since 2003. So lets bring us up to 2008. The war in Iraq is the critical issue in the election of 2008 and this helps propel Obama to victory first in the Democratic primaries and then in the general election in the fall of 2008. So it's very clear that the war and public frustration with the war strengthens the democrats and contributes to their electoral victory in 2008. The other thing that's important to note though, it's not just that the war strengthens the democratic party, the war also breeds a deep frustration within the Republican party to President Bush and the fiscal excesses of his administration. So if we think about how the broader war against terror is financed and the policies implemented under the Bush administration, we have tax cuts to make the conflicts more politically palatable, domestically. So there's a growth in deficits. The U.S. government isn't taking enough revenues and it's spending a lot more on national defense. So we've got growing deficits that seem to violate conservative principles, the war is not going well, we have a financial crisis that occurs during President Bush's administration. He then begins the process of bailing out the banks, and its this frustration with the policies of the Bush administration that generates this internal revolt within the Republican party organized around the tea party movement. So the point here is it's not just that the democrats are strengthened by the policies of the Bush administration, we also see the beginnings of this insurgency among conservatives within the Republican party at the same time because they feel like the Bush administration has violated basic Republican principles. Alright then what happens? The election of President Obama and the policies that he implements at least through 2010 help to further augment and strengthen the tea party and here it's growing resistance to the expansion or their view of expansion of government policies in the Obama administration. So we can think about this in terms of the stimulus response to the banking crisis that expands the federal deficit in 2009. The continuation of the bank bailout and then Obamacare. So what happens is, Obama gets two years with democratic majorities in the House and Senate in 2009 and 2010. And then its this Tea Party resurgence or I should say surge, that's catapulted via his policies in 2009 and 2010 that then help to empower Republicans to take back the House in 2010 through this Tea Party wave. Alright. So now we've got this growth of the Tea Party wave and we can see then an emerging conflict and this is one of the reasons why we have had stalemate in Congress over the last five or six years. Part of the challenge has been building a sustainable coalition in the Republican side of the house. And this is one of the reasons why John Boehner got pushed out of his leadership position is because the growing strength of the Tea Party movement within the Republican party has tried to bring the party as a whole back further to the right. Most importantly we can see this tension between these two wings within the Republican party now in the presidential campaign. So we can go to the slide and we can think about this.. conflict in terms of kind of three leading candidates in the race. And so Trump is drawing on the Tea Party base that is absolutely furious with the politicians and the policies that they have enacted since 9/11 that seem to have increased the power of the federal government relative to society. I think something important to realize here is that Trump's supporters are stable. He has polled consistently high for I don't know, going on six or seven months now. And if anything the research on this and focus groups that Frank Luntz did a very interesting series of focus groups a few months ago and what he found is that Trump supporters are unique in that when they see negative ads or criticism of Trump their support for Trump actually goes up. This is the opposite of normal politics. Negative ads lead voters to move away from the candidate being criticized. It's the opposite with Trump and so we have a very stable group of support for Trump now that's mostly from the Tea Party wing of the party, reinforced by the endorsement of Sarah Palin. And this portion of the party is responsible for now 30-40% of the election or of the Republican base and that's about where Trump has been polling and this is the group that he's been relying on to remain far ahead in the polls. That's one faction within the party. The second group are the social conservatives and generally they are supporting Ted Cruz. This is an important component of the party but note it's not large enough to carry the nomination on it's own. Social conservatives need to find another coalition to build a majority within the party. And so this is ultimately going to complicate Cruz's path to the White House and if you want a historical precedent to this, just look back to 2012. Rick Santorum built on a similar coalition of support but it wasn't enough to propel him to the White House because it's less than a majority of the party. So that's our second faction. And then the third we have establishment Republicans and right now this is maybe making up about 40% of the party but the challenge is they're dividing up that portion of the Republican party among multiple candidates. So the longer they - and right now it's Kasich, Rubio, and Bush. But the longer they wait to consolidate, the further Trump gets ahead in the process. And so this builds a much larger question. Given what we're seeing in the campaign and in the debates, whoever wins in this process can the party then unite around one candidate? Or are we effectively seeing a Civil War being waged in which they don't consolidate support around one candidate after the nomination process is complete? Now what's important in this process remember that Trump has long threatened to go independent if he didn't win the nomination. Now he's backed off that, but he might do it again. The other thing to note though is after the debate on Saturday, remember this debate is in South Carolina. We've got the South Carolina primaries coming up, Lindsay Graham, an important Senator from South Carolina who is an establishment Republican stated that he might be now rethinking about revisiting his willingness to support Donald Trump if he's the nominee given what he said about George W. Bush in the debate and the foreign policies that Trump is suggesting that he will follow and so the thing we want you to take away from this is we've got this split in the Republican party, potentially a civil war that could complicate Republican's ability to win in the general election. Much of this split though I think can be traced back to the legacy of the war in Iraq. It's altering internal politics within the Republican party. And just go back to how Trump finished that quote, do you see the anger and the frustration in who he's trying to appeal in those statements, right? He's arguing that the Bush administration made the United States less safe. Bigger charge - the Bush administration allowed 9/11 to happen and then responded to 9/11 with a disastrous war based on a series of lies. These are incredibly inflammatory statements. >> Right. I mean it's amazing that those kinds of statements come from within the Republican party because that is precisely the type of attacks that will come in a general election from the democratic side and now you've got footage from internal folks. But one of the things to just reiterate is that this isn't just about Donald Trump. It's not a personality clash between Donald Trump and Jeb Bush, that he'll say anything about Jeb Bush and his family to get elected or tear down Jeb Bush or what have you. The point that's being made here is that this is a deeper division within the Republican party and one thing that I do want to just sort of note or even throw out there for further discussion is is that this is a tricky issue. The legacy of the Iraq war is a very tricky issue for the Republican party because although there is a faction within the Republican party that is attracted to Donald Trump precisely because of his expression of frustration with that foreign policy legacy and the actions that were taken, there's not a majority within the Republican party that share these views that the Iraq war is not a problem for a majority of the Republican party that it's just that it's just that unpopular. A majority of the Democratic party sure, but not a majority of the Republican party. And so when you want to ask the question who can unite the Republican party, that question is really interesting because an Establishment candidate is going to have a hard time appealing to the Trump supporters, they're not going to want to rally behind them but how would Trump be able to get all those people who don't agree with his depiction of what the Bush administration - they agree with Rubio and Cruz and Jeb Bush and everyone else who says no, the Bush administration kept us safe. That they did the right thing. And so that's going to be a tricky thing. Say Trump wins the nomination. Where do all those people who think that what Trump said at the debate was crazy about their own Republican party. That's gonna be -- >> And that's why what Lindsey Graham said is so significant and it's important to watch what the Establishment candidates say when they drop out of the race. About this question. Because they're going to get asked this. Are you going to support Trump? Because Trump supporters aren't going anywhere. The longer this group of Establishment stays in, Trump's going to continue to lead in the polls and they're going to get asked this. One last point. We just want to reinforce. The larger theme here is war, external events, shape domestic politics in the United States. We are still living politically with the consequences, now 13 years later after the war in Iraq was first launched, right? The United States, the political system in the United States doesn't exist in a vacuum. It's shaped by the larger set of global forces. >> And this spills over to the Democratic party too. I mean one of the biggest attacks that Bernie Sanders has against Hilary Clinton is her votes in favor of the Iraq war 13 years ago. And that dogged her in the 2008 campaign and helped propel Barack Obama to the White House and it could do it again so this is - and that changes a lot. So let's move on to our next In The News section and that is the untimely death and surprising death of Justice Scalia who died over the weekend and has now created something of a fire storm around the replacement of this longstanding justice. And so this was the biggest news story over the weekend. He died here in Texas in a hunting lodge, resort. And he was the longest serving justice on the current Supreme Court. And not only that but he was highly influential. He was the most outspoken, and sort of prestigious/influencial member of that conservative faction on the Supreme Court that consistently, but not always, but consistently included five justices and thus a narrow majority for a relatively conservative agenda. And this includes of course, the Chief Justice John Roberts but he's not nearly or hasn't been in a lot of his votes, nearly as conservative as Justice Scalia. Now his death means that there are now currently eight members of the Supreme Court and those eight members of an even numbered Supreme Court are evenly divided between four relatively liberal justices and four conservative justices. And the first thing to note about how this impacts foreign policy and we'll get into specifics in just a second is that the Supreme Court does not pause its work and wait for a new justice to be appointed by the President of the United States and confirmed by the U.S. Senate. They will forge ahead, the Supreme Court will, and make rulings and the like with eight members. And if there are tied votes four to four, what happens? Well what happens is that the decision of the lower court on that case is upheld. But that decision does not apply outside of the particular local jurisdiction that that case was being argued on. And so sometimes this outcome of a four-four tie that then resorts down to the lower court decision will help the conservative side on an issue and sometimes this will help the liberal side on an issue depending on what was ruled at the lower level court and so that kind of depends on which local level court was making the rulings. There's regional geographic differences that play out here. And so since the lower court ruling does not produce Supreme Court precedent, the issue that is being decided whether it's about abortion or about unions or about immigration, these are all issues that are in the court docket right now that these things won't necessarily go away. They can be re-litigated again and so if there's a four-four tie stalemate, it goes down to the lower level court decision, it can kind of bubble up and come back to the Supreme Court at some future date but that could very well take a while and it's not assured. And so this has some pretty substantial consequences for current Supreme Court cases that have huge potential effects on American politics. And in particular, the Supreme Court has two cases that directly touch upon foreign policy that we'll be talking about today. One is President Obama's immigration executive order which we discussed in an earlier in the news segment in this class. And the other is a case on recent Obama administration regulations from their Environmental Protection Agency, the EPA, to reduce carbon from power plants that were part of the recent Paris climate change talks that were held in late 2015. And so we're going to talk what one of the implications of the death of Justice Scalia is on Supreme Court cases that might affect foreign policy in immigration or climate change and the like. The other though, potential implication of this is in the political room. Because this is an election year, the politics surrounding the appointment of a new Supreme Court justice is particularly contentious and polarizing. It's always polarizing. These battles between-- especially when we have a president of one party and a Senate that has the majority of another party. It's always contentious. But when it's surrounded by an election, that polarization is even greater. So within hours, literally, of the announcement that Justice Scalia had died the political debate and battle, over who was going to name Scalia's successor, began. I mean they didn't wait for any sort of period after the announcement of his death. President Obama quite early on declared that he did plan to nominate a replacement for Justice Scalia before the end of his term, which is a little more than a year-- a little less actually than a year away from now. So he gets to serve not until just November election, of course, but until the next president's inaugurated early in 2017. The Republican-controlled Senate also declared that it would do what it could to block and delay this nomination, arguing the next president should get to name Scalia's successor. And so they argued that the American people should get to decide this appointment through the Presidential election. So the fight is on now about this vacancy and this vacancy itself could last quite a while. So let's take a look at both of these aspects. The death of Antonin Scalia will have important implications for foreign policy due to important court cases that have different outcomes without Scalia on the bench. And because this issue could change the dynamics of the Presidential and even Congressional election that may determine who is the next president and whether Republicans retain control over the Senate. Okay. So let's start with a closer look at the major immigration case that is in front of the Supreme Court. So just to review, this case about President Obama's Immigration executive order, looks at the constitutionality of that order. And there was a group of states, led by Texas, that sued to block President Obama's Immigration executive order and the lower court issued an injunction that put that policy on hold. And then President Obama asked the Supreme Court to rule on on the injunction quickly to prevent an undue delay in the policy, his immigration executive order. And the Supreme Court agreed to hear the case and they were planning to do that in April of this year, April 2016, but added a question on whether his immigration executive order violated the "take care" clause of the Constitution, which the president is supposed to take care that the laws be faithfully executed according to that clause of the Constitution. Now how does the death of Scalia factor into this? With Scalia is now gone, there is a good chance that this ruling could be a 4-4 tie. And a 4-4 tie in United States v. Texas, that's the name of the case, would leave the lower court injunction in place. And that would prevent president Obama's immigration order from going into effect for now. So in this case, much of the the advantage remains with the Conservatives within the Supreme Court in general. Since the lower case ruling went against the Obama administration and it would be left intact. Some argue that this prospect of a tie on the Supreme Court leaving the injunction in place and sort of circumventing Obama's executive order could lead some of the justices, in particular, justice Anthony Kennedy, who is always a swing voter on the Supreme Court to side with the liberal faction on this issue and uphold Obama's immigration order. So that's the first big question. Now moving on to the second case that has international implications. This one deals with climate change. There is this current case on President Obama's policy to reduce carbon emission from power plants. And there are several important implications for foreign policy. Most fundamentally, the Supreme Court looked like it might strike down a central part of Obama's climate change strategy when Scalia was still on the bench. Moreover, this policy was part of the US commitment to controlling emissions as part of international talks in Paris to control carbon. So if the United States shows a weakened commitment to controlling emissions because the Supreme Court strikes down the heart of Obama's climate change agenda then other countries might start to hesitate to follow through on their commitments that were just reached the end of last year in Paris. So this is a big case. So the basics of the case are pretty simple. The cornerstone of President Obama's pledge in Paris about controlling emissions were EPA rules that cut carbon from power plants. And these rules are called the Clean Power Plant Plan. Now industry groups and about 27 states are currently suing to overturn the Clean Power Plan in court. And they're arguing that the EPA overstepped its authority under the Clean Air Act to regulate carbon the way it did. Right before Scalia's death, the conservative faction within the Supreme Court took a very important action. On February 11, which is last week, the five conservative justices including Scalia voted 5-4 to issue a stay on the Clean Power Plan. And that stay just postpones implementation while the court case was being heard and it's not being heard at the Supreme Court yet. It's being heard in the DC Circuit Court. Many argued that this stay by the five conservative justices suggests that they were inclined to strike down President Obama's environmental regulations in this case. So now there are only eight members and things may change. In a 4-4 tie, everything remains the same because Scalia is not on there anymore. This would mean that the Supreme Court would not make the ruling and all of the action on this particular set of rules would go to the lower court, which is the Washington DC Circuit Court and that decision, whatever they make, would be upheld. That decision hasn't been made yet. There's a three judge panel but most observers expect that three judge panel to rule in favor of the Obama administration just because of its make up. It has two democratically appointed justices, the third one was appointed by George H. W. Bush but has signaled a lot of support for environmental regulations in the past. And so in this particular case, the absence of Scalia will result in the tie and in that tie, the lower court's decision will actually help the Obama administration. And so in this case, it goes the other way. And the final thing to look at and just briefly, is the partisan battle over Scalia's replacement. As I've already said President Obama is determined to make a nomination. The Republican-controlled Senate is very committed to blocking that nomination. And this battle, very public battle, over this nomination will have huge impacts on the election campaign. In the Presidential campaign, it'll have huge impacts on both sides. There's going to be a conflict in recrimination within the Republican party about who is reliable to appoint a conservative justice. And there's going to be a lot of questions about Donald Trump and his conservative credentials. There might be an opening for Ted Cruz on this particular issue because of his background with the Supreme Court. On the Democratic side, there will be a lot of debate about who could work with what is likely going to be a Republican-controlled Senate to nominate a justice that will actually get confirmed. And so Barry Sanders might run into some questions about how well he can manage that process. On both sides, this raises the stakes of this election yet again. And electability will become an even bigger issue because whoever gets elected president not only gets to do all of things that they have already been discussing but now gets to shape the Supreme Court in a way that could have very long range implications. So I'll end there but if you want to add anything. >> You could tell even though football season is over, you said Barry Sanders rather than Bernie Sanders. >> Barry Sanders. [laugh] >> Bernie. Barry. >> I understand. It's okay. The other thing to think about. What's very interesting on the electoral dynamics of this is how McConnell potentially gave Obama a gift by coming out so quickly and this has been the conversation in the news. Coming out so quickly against Obama naming a successor and this has been part of the narrative that's emerged in the last couple of days. And political risk here is that by coming out so quickly and saying no, and not allowing the political process to work, the Constitutional process to work, which is give the person a fair hearing if you want to vote no, go ahead and vote no. But what that does is if they-- and notice a bunch of Republican Senators have lined up behind McConnell, they've created an opportunity in a sense, a political opportunity for Obama to agenda set this issue. This can then creep into his appointment process. And so he might think to himself if I can't get anybody passed the Republicans, why don't I pick a candidate that appeals to the base or potentially allows us to expand our base in key swing states and this has already been talked about in the news. >> Put a Westerner around there. >> Put a Westerner. Put a woman up as a nominee and put the Republicans in the difficult position of voting no against that. And so this decision that McConnell made happened like this. And it was clear like we had talked about last week, there wasn't a lot of strategy behind this and this is definitely going to make the Supreme Court nomination a key wedge issue in the election. The other thing to think about this is go back to the--move away from the domestic politics of this, go back to the domestic politics of international agreements and the climate change and how this-- Think about how difficult it is to get an international agreement. Think about the progress that was made in December. And think about how this could derail it completely. >> Right. It's all about good faith. And if you start making concessions and making commitments and then after the biggest player, the United States, makes a commitment, it gets foiled by the internal process that a lot of countries don't get why they get to change their position because of the Supreme Court. It's a problematic thing. >> Yes. It complicates the long term viability of the agreement. 