 The first thing we need to do, when thinking about the role of international organizations, such as the United Nations and NATO, is to define institutions. We're going to be analyzing the impact of these institutions, but like any other big concept, the definition of what a political institution is, is contentious. Right? And so academics and media commentators will often refer to entities like Congress or the Supreme Court or the United Nations, as institutions. People talk about the institution of marriage. There's people that will say a certain person with a long tenure and a good reputation is an institution, right? So, Pat McDonald likes to think of himself as an institution, here, on the University of Texas. These rather loose uses of the word institution, really just confuse matters. So, let me try to get a basis and bottom line definition about what an institution is and is not. For our purposes here in this class, institutions are rules. Such as, let me say that again. Institutions are rules. They are nothing more than that. They're nothing less. And now, on your slide, I give you a more expansive and formal definition of institutions. Institutions are the rules of the game in a society. Or, more formally, are the humanly devised constraints that shape human interaction. In consequence, they structure incentives in human exchange, whether political, social or economic. And so by referring to institutions as rules of the game, this definition gets to an important element of institutions. Institutions are rules governing human interaction. Also note in in this definition the mention of incentives. This is a key point. Like most rules, institutions tend to reward certain behaviors and punish other ones. This idea of incentives is central to, understanding how the rules influence politics. And so we're going to be talking about institutions. But our real analytical point is that the institutions, the rules in place revolving around the United Nations or around, in domestic politics, Congress are meant to channel behavior. To, to make it run in a certain direction through adding offering incentives in the rules or punishments concerning behavior. So let's think about some examples of institutions. Pat's a lot of things, but he's not an institution. He thinks, he thinks he is. But he's he's not just rules, although he likes to talk about rules all the time. >> You know my son when he does things like that? I say, is that a truth or a lie? >> That makes sense, huh? Yes. You are, you are the truth, man. So, Pat McDonald's is not an institution, but what about marriage? Marriage, I would say, is actually something akin to an institution because marriage is nothing more than some, you know, I mean, it's a lot of important things. I'm married. I don't wanna give any bad you know, response. But it's rules. Right? And, my personal experience with marriage, which is, getting into dangerous territory, is that, I don't know the rules. But my wife does, and she keeps telling me when I violate them, right? But, rules governing things like, interactions, like marriage, are what we're talking about. So, when we're talking about political institutions in trying to get at how, certain sets of rules govern politics, what we're talking about are institutions like the Constitution in the United States. The Constitution is a set of rules with the Bill of Rights and the set up for Congress, or the Supreme Court, or the Executive Branch. Federalism, and the demarcation of powers between the National Government and the State Government. Again, an institution. All Federalism is, is a set of rules governing these different levels of government, right? And so institutions or rules, electorial systems, which is something that I study in my research, are rules. They're an institution. They translate votes in an election into seats. And there are different ways to do that and depending on the way you translate votes into seats you're going to have different outcomes. Now one thing I want to do is to differentiate here between an organization and an institution. So a lot of times you'll talk about Congress as an institution. Is Congress an institution? I would argue no, Congress is not an institution, it is an organization. It is a political entity, and this distinct. It has institutions in that govern its behavior and inner workings, but it's not an institution itself, it's a political actor that can pass laws or not pass laws and the like. The rules governing internal workings of Congress are institutions. Institutions are rules. And so rules that either shut off debate or allow a debate to go on, on a bill, those are institutions. Who and how one can add an amendment to the Constitution or add a writer to a bill is an institution, right? So it's the rules that our institution. Congress itself is an organization, but the rules within Congress are the institutions that help to provide incentives and disincentives for certain actions. 