 Rob has defined institutions and organizations. I now want to talk about how they influence international politics. So let's start with first international institutions. Again, we can think about these as rules that guide interactions among states. So let me briefly give you two examples of these rules. The first is simply the presence or absence of sovereignty by some political organization. So what's sovereignty? Sovereignty is the external recognition of one state's right to have political authority, by other states. So it's the external recognition of one state's sovereignty by current states that already possess sovereignty. It's this legal recognition of the new state's right to exist. This political existence means possessing the legal right to set laws that regulate the daily lives of citizens living within that new state's territorial boundaries. The possession of sovereignty also fosters an expectation of noninterference in the domestic politics by other states. So for example, China and Russia frequently appealed to this rule of sovereignty when the United States, or say the European Union, criticizes them on human rights issues. The possession of sovereignty also creates an expectation that a government's territorial borders will not be violated in an unauthorized fashion, say through some military invasion. Governments can point to the violation of sovereignty to justify, to then justify some type of armed response. So, first example of an, of an international rule that shapes how states interact with each other is sovereignty. A second example of an important rule is that of trade liberalization. Since 1945 there has been an expectation that states would reduce trade barriers like tariffs on international commerce. The general agreement on tariffs and trade or the GAT and its successor organization, the World Trade Organization, were specifically set up to defend and extend this rule of trade liberalization. This rule itself has shaped trade negotiations between states over the last 70 years. And a widespread acceptance of its legitimacy has played an important role in the expansion of globalization and commerce during that same period. So these rules create expectations about how states will interact with each other and about how they will bargain with each other say in multilateral forums like the World Trade Organization. So now let's move from institutions to organizations, like the World Trade Organization and the United Nations. Organizations matter in global politics, sometimes because they capac -- because they sometimes possess the capacity to enforce the rules that they are designed to promote. There's huge variation, though, among the international organizations in terms of this relative enforcement capacity. So what is enforcement capacity? It means that the organization possesses the means to punish a member state if it violates that organization's directive or policy. The best example of an international organization that possesses real enforcement capacity is the World Trade Organization. It possesses a judicial mechanism that is designed to interpret and enforce a series of trade agreements that states have made among themselves. When states feel that other states have withdrawn agreed-upon trade concessions that were made in the past, they can effectively sue other states through the World Trade Organization. A judicial panel is empowered, and it issues a ruling in favor of either the plaintiff or the defendant. If this judicial panel sides with the plaintiff, it also authorizes the plaintiff to then impose a set of retaliatory tariffs that are designed to punish the defendant, and here's where this enforcement capacity emerges. There's a problem though with expecting international organizations to do a lot of punishing to ensure compliance with international law or with other international agreements among states. The World Trade Organization is rare. States rarely endow these international organizations with this enforcement capacity. Instead, most international organizations, like the United Nations, often have to delegate this enforcement function or capacity to states. The United Nations doesn't have an army that it can send into battle. If, say, in the 1990s when Iraq wasn't following its security council resolutions. This creates another problem though, because enforcement is costly for states, and perhaps even against their own more narrow, interests, they may balk at such directives coming from an international organization, like the United Nations. And, if that happens, if states are unwilling to play this enforcement function for an international organization, there's little that the organization can do about that. This ineffectiveness is behind much of the frustration with many international organizations. This problem effectively meant the death of the League of Nations in the 1920s and the 1930s. And later on in class we're gonna watch a video from John Stewart that nicely summarizes this criticism with respect to the United Nations. Well, even if international organizations are not capable of enforcing rules that they're supposed to promote, they still matter and they can matter in international politics by doing other things. The next thing I want to talk about is how they can provide information about the national interests of states and their trustworthiness. This provision of information helps to reduce uncertainty about a states future behavior, which can then help to foster cooperation in the future among states. So, let me give you an example of this. And, this, this is gonna be about Chinese membership in the World Trade Organization. So, before instituting this broad period of economic reform that we talked about last class, at the end of the 1970's, China maintained significant economic regulations that restricted the access of multinational businesses to its domestic market. We talked about how it then opened up its domestic economy in the 1970s. And, during the 1990s, China sought entry into the World Trade Organization because this membership would then allow its firms to face even lower trade barriers to their exports, to selling their products to member countries within the World Trade Organization. And, you can guess the most important member of the WTO was the United States because it has the largest domestic market. Chinese entry into the World Trade Organization in 2001 though, was not costless for China. It had to undertake more economic reforms that hurt its own domestic firms, say by making them more vulnerable to international market competition. You can think about this as a cutting tariff barriers that was helping to protect these domestic firms. So, China has to make these concessions as part of the larger costs for gaining better access to the American domestic market. And, this is what's important. Chinese, China's willingness to make these concessions to the WTO to impose some domestic pain on its own domestic firms, helps provide information to potential trading partners of China. It helps to provide information to politicians in the United States and Europe about China's long-term commitment to the broader policy of trade liberalization. All right, if China, if China was not serious about imposing economic reforms, then it wouldn't have -- And, and, and maintaining a consistent support for trade liberalization, five, ten, fifteen years in the future, it wouldn't have paid these domestic costs. So, what happens then is the world views these concessions as evidence of China's willingness to live within the current rules structuring international trade. Similarly, when a country allows inspectors, say from the United Nations, in their country to monitor their weapons programs. This is a device by which other countries try to acquire information about that country's likelihood of complying with any arms control agreement in the future. The international organization, like the United Nations, is viewed as a neutral party, in this case, that both sides trust to identify the truth, if it exists. This monitoring function itself, can then help to foster cooperation. Incidentally, the idea of monitoring and weapons inspectors obviously is a critical component of any deal between the United States and Iran over Iran's nuclear program. The theoretical argument here is absent -- These weapons inspectors, it will be very difficult for the United States to trust Iran that it was actually imposing curbs on its nuclear weapon programs. Well, if the United States can't trust Iran to limit its nuclear weapons program, say, five years from now, then there's no reason for Obama to make concessions in April of 2015. And so, what's important is the provision, or this international organization, that might then be able to monitor Iran's nuclear weapons program, helps to facilitate a deal between the United States and Iran today. Now, let me move on to another way in which international organizations structure international politics. They also matter in international politics by allocating power among states, or helping to secure their own power. In the sense, international organizations can rely on their rules to build up their own power to influence states. So, for example, just as there are criticisms of activist judges in the United States that are effectively writing laws independent of legislative bodies through precedent. Some of the same sets of charges have been leveled against the World Trade Organization, and its judicial mechanism. There's some concern that this dispute resolution mechanism is giving dispute panels, or the judges that write the decisions, the capacity to construct precedent which is shaping new international trade law. This process, itself, this judicial process, might be effectively removing even more power from legislatures, say Congress in the United States, to set their own country's trade policy. And the familiar criticism is the WTO, this judicial panel, is essentially allowing bureaucrats in Europe to make U.S. trade policy. The rules within organizations also allocate power among states by influencing the capacity of these member states to set the agenda by which issues are covered. Now, we can think about veto power held by the five permanent members of the UN Security Council in these terms. The U.S. has used it's seat at the security council to prevent the broader international community from use, using the United Nations to adopt a series of measures that impose a peace settlement on Israel and Palestine, and which would effectively grant sovereignty to Palestine. Instead, even though the United States supports a two-state solution, the United States wants a peace settlement, and Palestinian statehood to emerge from diplomatic negotiations between the two parties. In this way, the United States has used its institutional power, stemming from that veto on the Security Council at the UN, to block the rest of the international community from imposing a new political solution on the Palestinian issue on Israel. Now, this capacity to confer power among states also shows up in another way through the permanent five of the UN Security Council. And, this was discussed in one of your readings for today. That unique power, held by the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, reflects, or reflected the distribution of military power among states in 1945. It's not the reality of today's international political system. These rules within the UN that govern access to the Security Council, thus limit the institutional power of some very important states in the current system. Like Germany, Brazil, India and Japan, that have been denied this influence stemming from permanent veto power held by, say, the United States or Russia. This potential for international organizations to preserve existing distributions of power among states is part of the broader view held by John Ikenberry. That the United States should participate actively in the international organizations. Ikenberry argues we shouldn't run away from these things. We should bind American influence through these international organizations. Why? Organizations like the United Nations, NATO, the World Trade Organization, and the International Monetary Fund have helped to promulgate and defend policy ideas consistent with American interests. Like democracy promotion, free trade, respect for human rights, and the construction of an effective collective security organizations to protect Europe since 1945. So, these organizations, what he argues, have cemented American power in the last 70 years. He also argues that the institutional missions of these organizations will survive long after American power recedes. Consequently, participation in them is a way to lock in policies, ideas, and regulations that benefit the United States today and potentially 50 years into the future. His arguments are also, though, linked to the fundamental problem of politics that we discussed earlier in the class, shortly after the midterm. United States has used its military and economic power, particularly after 1945, to set up these organizations that promote its policy goals. However, because they're multilateral other states can also work through these organizations to check or constrain American policy when they oppose it. Or to alter American policy when they oppose it. For example, by denying access to American military bases in Turkey, that were established through NATO, Turkey can strain the ability of the United States to fight wars against both Iraq in 2003, and against ISIS. Ikenberry argues that the presence of these potential constraints on American Foreign Policy help to legitimate American power, and ultimately preserve it by reassuring states that they possess other states, that they possess some institutional means to check arbitrary uses of military force by the United States. 