 This section has identified a number of ways in which international institutions and international organizations matter in world politics. I want you to keep this in mind when you hear criticisms of international organizations as ineffective. Because they do not possess the capacity to enforce their directives. Yes, international organizations can be frustrating sometimes for this very reason. However, they still play an important role in international politics though by shaping expectations about how states will behave in the future. Which can then make it easier for states to coordinate their behavior and cooperate in the present. Think here about the rule that we all drive on the right hand side of the road, how it helps to prevent car accidents. You can say the same thing with respect to sovereignty. It creates expectations about how states will conduct their relations with each other. Things that they can do. And things that they should not do. Now international organizations also help to foster cooperation between states by providing information about their national interests. That can then be used to make predictions about their willingness to cooperate in the future. Finally, international organizations also help to influence the distribution of political power among states. They can help to lock in old distributions as the UN has done with respect to the distribution of political power in 1945. For this very reason, John Ikenberry argues that the US should play by the rules of the game. That it helped to set up, after 1945, because those very rules have been tremendously beneficial for the United States. Now as a means of transition into a brief discussion of the United Nation, we thought we would, should do a quick video from the Daily Show that deals with these very issues. John Stewart, in this video, is criticizing the UN's inability to secure a durable cease fire in the most recent military conflict between Israel and Hamas. While he is criticizing the UN as ineffective, I want you to ask yourself a question. If the UN is so ineffective, why does everyone care what the UN does? Why did the United States and Israel try to block efforts there to recognize Palestinian state hood. So let's go ahead and run that clip. >> Things are spiraling out of control. I think it's time for a higher authority to intervene. >> Early this morning, the United Nations Security Council convening in an emergency meeting. >> And emergency midnight meeting. >> Stand back bitches. The UN is in town. You mess with the Bonkey, you get the moon. And this isn't some pansy ass, UN general assembly meeting. This is the UN Security Council emergency meeting. The big dogs. The power players. The original kings of diplomacy. That includes China, Russia, France the UK, the United States. The countries that probably gave the weapons in the first place. But still, throwing down an emergency midnight meeting, about to get real, peaceful. >> The UN Security Council called for an immediate unconditional cease fire. >> Boom. Unconditional. Not that such resolutions are in any way enforceable or meaningful, but still. When a resolution is issued. >> The United Nations Security Council took action with a statement, not a resolution. >> Even a resolution was too much? "Guys, I don't know, a resolution seems pretty" "stern, pretty stern guys." "E, e, even a statement, I, I don't know. I don't, what's, what's the death toll?" "1,000 and growing? I -- What about we just jump in with a, "Hey, guys," you know," "and if that gets pushed back, we can take it down a notch. I mean, we're only a" "collection of the world's super powers." Turns out the Security Council is about as strict with the Mid-East as museums are with their admission price. >> Okay, so John Stewart is essentially arguing that the U.N. is worthless. At least in this instance with respect to trying to secure a cease-fire in Gaza. But this really just begs an important question. Why do American leaders and the world, then, care so much about the U.N.? Why did President Obama use appearances there in the fall of 2014 to launch a new initiative on the environment, and to proclaim the construction of a new coalition to confront ISIS? Why did the Bush administration work so hard in 2002 and 2003 to secure U.N. approval for the approaching war with Iraq? The answers to these questions rest in part on the capacity of the U.N. to bestow political legitimacy on some set of foreign policy actions. In the case of American foreign policy, securing international legitimacy can reduce the costs associated with implementing some action, either in terms of facing less resistance from potential international opponents. Or picking up new coalition partners that then contribute to the policy's execution. Yes, the U.N. can be frustrating in its incapacity to respond to crises. This stems largely from its near universal membership. Everyone's there. It shouldn't come as a big surprise to you that it can be really difficult to get countries to agree. During the Cold War American and Soviet veto power on the Security Council led them to block each others moves and contributed significantly to the neutralization of the organization. However, this universality plays a large role in it's capacity, even its capacity to confer legitimacy on a government's policies. Why did the U.S. want U.N. approval to go to war against Iraq? Because that would have provided political cover for the decision to go to war. It would be harder for countries to publicly oppose the war if such a large group of states voiced their support for the United States through the U.N. Similarly Terry Chapman, a professor here at UT, argues that UN approval can shape public opinion in the United States when a president contemplates the use of force. He finds that support for war domestically goes up, when the president secures U.N. approval. In sum, the United Nations can be a powerful source of legitimacy for potentially controversial policies. This is why presidents often seek its approval. Finally, I just want to conclude this section by acknowledging the real tension that exists, between working through some intero -- working through some international organizations to manage America's relations with other countries. And a powerful domestic imperative to preserve the capacity of the American government to remain sovereign in affecting public policy. This domestic imperative is often a powerful source of resistance to working within the UN or other organizations like the ICC, the International Criminal Court. And you should be aware that there's a real challenge to democracy here. On the very last day of the semester, we willl read an article that confronts this possibility. Basically arguing that globalization creates pressures to set economic policy within an international organization. Which in turn, means surrendering democratic control over American economic policy. In effect, the pressures of globalization could be forcing Congress to cede control over important aspects of foreign economic policy to the bureaucrats of the World Trade Organization in Geneva. And this tension animates much of the support for pursuing a grand strategy, around unilateral implementation of American foreign policy when necessary. 