 We're gonna move on now to a discussion about NATO. And what, NATO is another very important international organization, and the rules, the institutions revolving around NATO are an excellent example of how institutions shape and influence international politics. For example, the rules governing NATO's inner workings, but most importantly also is external relations. Such as, the rule that an attack on any one member state within NATO will be viewed as an attack on all member states, lies at the very heart of the collective security guarantee of the alliance. Right? And so NATO is another good example of how states sort of bind themselves and try to make commitments through institutions, through rules like that of NATO and their rule about attacks on member states, to provide information and guarantees to shape behavior in the future. Now, what we're going to be talking about here when, concerning NATO is the question of how institutions evolve over time when circumstances change. And NATO is a perfect example of this because NATO was born during the Cold War, right, for a specific purpose of deterring Soviet attack on western Europe in particular. But then that situation changed with the collapse of the Soviet Union, and so what happens to NATO and all of its rules governing it's members after some huge change? And so, in order to do this we're gonna talk about the origins of NATO first, and then what happened to NATO after the end of the Cold War. Now, the alliance -- the NATO alliance chief function during the Cold War was to provide military security for western Europe against the possibility of a Soviet attack. However, the Cold War alliance had multiple functions that made NATO a robust part of a general collective security arrangement in Europe. These multi-faceted set of benefits from the institution of NATO and the commitments that it enacted, help to explain in part NATO's staying power during the four-plus decades of the Cold War, but also even after the end of the Cold War. So what were the benefits of NATO? There were three goals of NATO when it was formed. NATO performed these three interlocking goals and this helped to establish a zone of peace in western Europe during the Cold War. One of the original founders of NATO, General Lord Ismay, it's first secretary general, perhaps described these mutually supportive goals best, right? At the very beginning of the Cold War when he said the goal of NATO was quote "to" "keep the Russians out, the Americans in, and the Germans down." Despite being perhaps overly candid for a diplomat, these three goals represent three general benefits of the collective security arrangement that NATO established. So first off, keeping the Russians out simply refers to NATO as the pillar of American-led containment of the Soviet threat in the most vital arena of the Cold War, Europe. It provided protection of Europe from the threat of Soviet conventional and nuclear attack. This provision of security was arguably the cornerstone of peace and prosperity for the whole region for the second half of the 20th century. And so deterring and containing the communist threat from the Soviet Union in western Europe was the key pillar of NATO. But secondly, keeping the Americans in, referred to NATO as a binding mechanism for American military power. By establishing an American-led alliance system, NATO provided a necessary hegemon for the collective security arrangement. As the hegemon, the dominant player there, the United States provided essential public goods, like military might, just as past discussion of hegemonic stability theory would expect. But it also served as a binding mechanism to restrain US military power. The alliance, the NATO alliance forced the United States to act multilaterally rather than unilaterally, and to take into consideration the concerns of its European allies when formulating foreign policy and considering military interventions. And so, these two key aspects in, in keeping the Americans involved in western Europe was a key benefit as well. And the third thing, keeping the Germans down, referred to NATO's role in maintaining peace between the democratic powers in Europe by integrating them, the European states, into an alliance that was led by an outsider in the US. Now remember the German problem that Professor McDonald explained, right? Prior to the Cold War and the existence of NATO there were not one, but two World Wars that erupted between the very same states, Germany, Great Britain, and France mainly, that became later, reliable allies under the NATO umbrella. And so, by having NATO there and incorporating Germany that had been such a problem in previous wars into that NATO structure, it helped to change the expectations in the behavior of all the states, Germany itself, but also its neighbors, to make for more peace, right? Now, despite these major three benefits, NATO also provided some dilemmas that we need to emphasize. The first dilemma was the potential for European shirking. There was a problem of European countries simply shirking their responsibility to provide their own military security by not spending enough on their militaries during the Cold War, or even after the Cold War ended. This continues to be a big problem, to this very day. Robert Gates, the former secretary of defense under both presidents Bush and Obama, complained about the Europeans neglecting their own self defense in a memoir after he resigned from his position. But this problem goes all the way back to NATO's origins in the Cold War. President Eisenhower in the 1950s that had a quote that, that captures this quite well, right? He said of, of European shirking, "they won't make the sacrifices to provide the" "soldiers for their own defense because," he's implying, "the United States is doing" "it for them," right? Now, related to this problem of European shirking, sort of the converse of it, is the role of the US, as a potentially reluctant hegemon, right? NATO provides a lot of benefits to the US, and one can't ignore that. But it also represented a huge burden. The US was providing the vast majority of the security for all of Europe. Particularly in times when the US economy was not doing very well, it was very difficult for the American public and its politicians to continue to shoulder this burden. And you get then, calls from observers, like in your readings by Barry Posen in his Pull Back article, that for the United States to reduce its role in NATO, in order to force the hand of European countries to provide more of their own security and relieve the burden of the United States to be the only source for this security. Throughout the Cold War, there were voices always calling for similar reductions by the United States especially when it was weaker relative to its allies. 