 Let's move on then to the dynamics around the end of the Cold War. At the end of the Cold War, NATO faced the crisis of its own relevance. And, here's the point we want to make here, is how do institutions change when all the circumstances surrounding them change? At the end of the Cold War, its main mission, containing the Soviet threat, was accomplished and because of that there was a question, why did it need to continue to exist at all? In reality, NATO faced several counter-pressures with some corners calling for the end of its existence, while others wanted to see it continue and even expand. And so, we're gonna look at this debate about NATO expansion or not, in the context of the end of the Cold War. So, let's start with the dilemmas for NATO at the end of the Cold War. The first, and most fundamental dilemma, was the loss of NATO's mission. At its core, NATO was a collective security alliance that included a promise that an attack on any member state would be considered an attack on all member states. During the Cold War, the central threat of any attack came from the Soviet Union, its allies in Eastern Europe, right? And, those groups of states formed a corresponding alliance to NATO called the Warsaw Pact. When Communist regimes started to collapse in Eastern Europe in 1989, in 1990, and the Soviet Union itself eventually disintegrated into 15 new states, the threat of the Soviet Union, I mean even in the Soviet Union itself, just simply ceased to exist. The Warsaw Pact disbanded, and then many observers argued that this should also mean the end of NATO. However, others, including NATO itself as an organization, did not want to simply disband just because its central mission had been accomplished. And, this is one of the fascinating characteristics of organizations, both domestic and international. They achieve a life of their own, kind of independent of their founding mission. They have members whose livelihoods depend on the existence of the organization. They have constituents who gain benefits from the organization, and all of these actors want the organization to stick around. Right? So, what is a collective security alliance that suddenly, and rather inexpectedly, loses its main threat and adversaries supposed to do? Right, I mean who are they going to fight? Well, you find new missions, and you find new adversaries. And so,for NATO advocates, the search for new missions started very early. There were several new potential missions, or threats out there. One was the task of integrating former East European states that had been satellites of the Soviet Union after World War II. And, we'll talk about that process in just a minute. The other major candidate for a new mission for NATO were out of region interventions that involved using NATO military forces to intervene in civil and regional conflicts outside of Europe. As we'll see in the section of On the Case, the argument for NATO expansion, this new mission about out of region conflicts, became one of the central arguments in favor of not only maintaining, but also expanding NATO. Okay, so next I want to discuss two dilemmas that emerged directly from the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. And, these dilemmas, these dilemmas kind of complicated things for NATO. So, not only did NATO have to find a new mission, but they had to figure out what to do with the former adversaries from the Cold War. Even though the Soviet Union was gone, its constituent parts, most importantly Russia, was still there, and we didn't know what to do about that. So, in many of these countries, these former Communist countries, popular social movements that were calling for Western-style democracy and free capitalist markets, right, free market systems, took to the streets and played a big role in removing Communist governments. And, and the West was really happy about that. Countries that were part of the former Warsaw Pact, like Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Romania, they were eager to join the West. And, they saw membership in NATO as a key stepping stone to full membership in the Western community in Europe. So, there was immense pressure coming from East European countries to enter NATO. And, they used many arguments to, to bolster their case, and their claim to be members of NATO. But, the most used one, was the argument that they were unfairly abandoned by the West, and particularly by the United States after World War II, when the Soviet military was still in East European countries. And Franklin D Roosevelt, President Roosevelt, brokered a settlement with Joseph Stalin that allowed the Soviet Union to continue its hegemony over them. The Soviet Union used its military occupation of these countries after World War II then to impose communist regimes, and we know the rest of the story. The East European countries, now that they have another shot at staying out of that circumstance, were determined not to be left vulnerable to possible future Russian hegemony again. Now, you might ask yourself why is this a dilemma for the West? Isn't this exactly what we wanted, right? During containment in the Cold War, and you're right. However, it still was complicated. All right? It, it, a dream come true, but still very difficult, right? Because it provided benefits of a larger and potentially more powerful NATO, but it also brought on increased burdens and obligations. Many of these Europeans countries were simply not ready arguably to join NATO. Because, their militaries were under funded, and they had, were lacking professionalization. Member states in NATO are required to not have border disputes and claims on their neighbors. But some countries in Eastern Europe did have these sorts of longstanding border claims, right? And finally, NATO members are supposed to be democratic, and East European countries coming out of Communism were having a hard time really institutionalizing democratic institutions. And so, in order to accomplish this incorporation, the United States tried to have a gradual approach that allowed for new entrants to come in waves, right? As they became sort of, more or less, ready. But this, this was a dilemma. And, one of the chief dilemmas also in incorporating East European countries into NATO was how their new post-Communist Russian state was going to react. Because in the aftermath of the collapse of the Soviet Union, Russia saw the expansion of NATO as a threat to it. Because historically, NATO was geared against the Soviet Union and the largest constituent part of that, Russia. So the next big dilemma, after the pressure for it to incorporate Eastern Europe, was what to do about Russia. Russia emerged out of the collapse of the Soviet Union with its own reformist president in Boris Yeltsin. He appeared to be committed to political and economic reform, toward democracy, and free markets, that we all know now, that the reforms didn't work quite the way they had been planned in the 90s. But at the time that NATO was expanding in the mid 90s, there was still hope that Russia would be on the track toward democracy. So what should NATO's approach to this new Russia be? As we'll see in a moment, the question on how to treat Russia was at the heart of the debate for and against the expansion of NATO. Some argued that once Russia got on its feet economically, it would again threaten its neighbors, and the West, and so, NATO should preemptively contain Russia, even though it was no longer Communist. From the other perspective, there was a range of calls to accommodate Russian interests from simply refraining the expanding NATO so that they wouldn't get mad to proposals to kind of gradually try to incorporate Russia as part of NATO in some capacity, either as a member or a pseudo-member, so that it wouldn't feel excluded, but rather somehow you know, marginally included. And so these were the dilemmas. Now, one last point before I end here. The debate then emerged in the mid-90s over whether NATO should be expanded or not, and you have a reading here by Mandelbaum that kinda captures one side of this debate, the case against NATO expansion. So let's just briefly go over the case for NATO expansion at the time and the case against. The case for NATO expansion, it's kind of already been stated here, was that NATO's original goals really still held, in the sense that NATO provided key benefits that could potentially, if Russia became antagonistic again, keep the Russians out. It still kept the Americans in and bound by this alliance structure, and it also continued to serve as a mechanism for a zone of peace in Europe, in particular, keeping Germany in check. And so from one sense, the original goal was still relevant, and so advocates of keeping NATO around and expanding NATO seized on this, right, that there should kinda be a neo-containment of Russia because it might inevitably become anti-western and all the other benefits that go with it. Secondly, there was also this sort of extension of mission from NATO that argued that NATO not only would do all of these good things in Europe, keeping Russia out, keeping U.S. in, et cetera, but also could be used as a mini-UN that could allow U.S., the United States, and its allies, to have a smaller group that could get behind interventions in the Middle East, for example, and not have to rely on the UN for legitimation. Right? Now let's move on to the case against NATO expansion. The case against NATO expansion took -- sorta was based on different premises, right? The first was that the mission of NATO was indeed accomplished, and thus there was no need for NATO to provide security for Europe. Europe could start providing security for itself. They didn't buy the idea that you needed neo-containment of Russia necessarily because Russia could be kind of turned into a more pro-western entity that wouldn't pose a threat. And so this leads to the central sort of so this loss of a mission would, they seized on it as a reason to kind of weaken or even disband NATO. But the key point here, the key assumption, was the reaction of Russia to NATO expansion. What the pessimists argued about NATO expansion was that NATO expansion, by adding new members up to the border of Russia, but excluding Russia itself, would backfire in terms of securing greater European security. And it would backfire, because it would antagonize Russia and make it an enemy. And here is we need to reiterate it. It was this idea that the, the character of Russia, after the Cold War, wasn't set. It was in evolution, but how you treat Russia will be vital to which way Russia goes. And if you expand NATO and don't include Russia, exclude it over their objections, then you will create an enemy that would not necessarily have been there without that action. And so, what they argued was that Russia was in a philosophical, sort of political debate within itself, between reformers who wanted to join the West and conservatives and nationalists who rejected the idea of joining the West, because they didn't trust the West. And what the pessimists, the critics of NATO expansion argued was that you're playing into the hands of the pessimists, the anti-reformers, the nationalists out there. If you expand NATO over the objections of Russia, you're proving their point. And arguably, some of the things that are happening now in Ukraine and the like are manifestations of this because critics like Mearsheimer would argue that, you know, one of the reasons Russia got involved in Ukraine was because they, they point to NATO expansion as the West's sort of opportunistic, kind of cynical drive to limit the interest of Russia. 