 So now let's turn to the reading that was assigned for today. We assigned this article to provide a broad overview of the current status of international organizations in shaping global politics. They're a couple of points that we would like you to take away from it. First, note the tremendous demand or need for forms of multilateral forums capable of dealing with emerging issues that have been activated by technological change in global politics. You can think of cyberspace in these terms. Who regulates the Internet? What is a legally appropriate response that a state might take when its computer infrastructure is hacked by a foreign government? What rights does a financial firm posses when its banking records are stolen by hackers for foreign intelligence agencies? Very quickly you can see a need for some sort of legal process to sort out and manage these disputes. More importantly, because these conflicts are likely to be transnational in that they span national boundaries, single states cannot resolve these problems on their own. This generates a need for new international organizations that provide an institutional infrastructure or simply a set of rules that foster the coordination of policy responses by individual governments to these challenges. Second, notice the criticism of the existing structure of international organizations in the piece. The claim is that these international organizations are too big and inefficient. Universal membership like that which exists in the United Nation is not all that it's cracked up to be. It can be incredibly difficult to build consensus among so many states. Consequently, governments are increasingly relying on adhoc or regional frameworks among smaller groups of countries to meet the big challenges associated with international politics today which might include climate change. He also notes that the difficulties associated with building consensus among so many different countries are also leading countries to adopt a peace meal or limited approach to these huge challenges that the globe faces. States are giving up on comprehensive packs among themselves on things like trade. He points to the failure of the Doha Rounds sponsored by the World Trade Organization as evidence of this turn toward incrementalism. Finally I just want to reinforce that he is not arguing that international cooperation among states is dying. Instead, it has become more diverse and more ad hoc. Think about this in terms of climate change. His arguments imply that we are unlikely to see some dramatic break through at some point in the near future in which states agree to radically cut carbon dioxide emissions. It's really hard for all states to make significant concessions in diplomatic negotiations and then steer them through the contentious ratification process in their domestic political system. And think about this and we'll talk about this in a few weeks with respect to the Paris Climate Accords. Instead, what we are likely to see is incremental progress across multiple international forums like the G20, the G8, the G2, the UN, and the World Trade Organization, or even other regional organizations. 