 ﻿1 This module is the first of two on finance and U.S. foreign policy. The prior module talked about the politics and economics of international trade, or the sale of goods and services across national boundaries. Here we are going to provide an introduction to the international politics of finance, which includes the transnational movement of capital. This discussion will allow us to think about how finance influences America's position in the world. I want to start, though, with a couple of pictures and a question that you can see now. The pictures and quotes are of Bill Clinton and one of his advisors James Carville. The Clinton quote refers to his frustration in 1993 when trying to construct an economic stimulus program to get the United States out of recession. It is taken from a book by Bob Woodward, and refers to a tacit deal that Clinton constructed with Alan Greenspan, who was then Chairman of the Federal Reserve. Clinton limited his stimulus plans, which would have involved borrowing money to increase government spending. He also raised taxes. In exchange, Greenspan agreed to hold interest rates relatively low, so that people could borrow money at lower rates. Clinton's component of the deal, raising taxes and keeping government and spending in check, was necessary to hold the deficit to sustainable levels. Greenspan wanted to limit government deficits so that bond holders would continue to fund the government by buying new bonds. In this way, pressures from bond holders, the group of financial interest responsible for lending money to the American government, were pushing Greenspan to pressure President Clinton to deviate from his most preferred economic policies, and as a quick sidebar to this discussion, a government deficit occurs when the government spends more money in a year than it takes in, in revenues, the most important of which are income taxes. So, the U.S. government can sustain deficits when individuals and groups with surplus capital, like mutual funds or pension funds, are willing to lend money to the United States government in the form of buying its treasury bonds. All right, so now let's return to the slide. The Carville quote reflects the same frustration that Clinton had with this deal. Together, these quotes raise an important question that we are going to examine over the course of the next two modules. How do capital markets influence politics, and constrain domestic and international policy? This narrative of domestic constraint, though, should be juxtaposed with a larger set of opportunities for international influence that have accrued to the United States because it possesses the deepest capital markets in the world, and because the dollar is still the principal reserve currency in the world. Paradoxically the world seems to need the American government to be in debt, because those bonds are liquid, and they act as a safe financial asset that other governments and financial institutions use as currency or cash. This demand for American debt helps to support policies in the United States, like prescription drug benefits, wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the post-2008 crisis economic stimulus that the American public is unwilling to pay for with higher income taxes. So, this possibility generates an important question, how does debt in well developed capital markets strengthen America's political influence around the world? In order to answer these questions, we need to take a couple of detours in this module, and really walk before we then run, in the next module. This walk necessitates presenting some finance fundamentals, including the basics of money, monetary policy, banking, and exchange rates. We will then exploit these fundamentals to answer some big questions about the political influence of finance. So, please hang with us through these segments. At multiple points, you might ask, why is a class on government talking about this seemingly boring finance stuff? Let me give you three reasons. First, if you think at some point that you might want to understand better what you're reading about in The Wall Street Journal, then these lectures will help. Second, if you think you are going to be buying a house in the next ten years, then this stuff is relevant. Third, this content is going to tell you why your future decision to buy a house could, in part, depend on what is going on in China. It's a truly global economy, and if you think now that the content in this session today is irrelevant to your life, and to the functioning of our political system, we're gonna give you ample reason to rethink those beliefs. So, the content for this introductory module to finance proceeds in four segments. The first defines money, and provides its three central functions in economic activity. The second defines monetary policy, and identifies three instruments of monetary policy, utilized by central banks like the Federal Reserve. The third defines inflation, and discusses some of the political challenges it poses to government officials. The fourth segment discusses the Federal Reserve, and its most recently policy innovation, something called quantitative easing. This policy tool, now widely adopted by other important central banks around the world, was a central response to the broader economic slow down in the United States that followed the financial crisis of 2008. This discussion will also necessitate a brief definitial detour that examines some basic properties of bonds. 