 We're going to start with one of the very fundamental issues here and that is the concept of money. And, I'm going to talk to you about the functions of money. So, money has three important functions. First, it serves as a medium of exchange that facilitates trade and specialization. We really couldn't operate the economy as we do without money. You can see this rather easily be asking yourself a hypothetical. Imagine that every transaction did not operate through the medium of money, but instead, necessitated some direct exchange of goods and services every time we acquired something new, right? Every time we needed to purchase a good or a service. This alternative reality would require me, for example, to locate some individual that was willing to provide a good. Let's say five pounds of beef, which I commonly consume five pounds of beef, I guess. >> Or as a service, like auto repair, much more realistic, in exchange for a lecture on the Cold War. Which, most people start to chuckle as if a lecture on the Cold War has little value. I would tend to disagree. Now I think you can see some of the hurdles though that this type of economy would create. I would spend quite a bit of time trying to locate people with an interest in the Cold War. Then from among that subset of people that wanted to learn about the Cold War, I would have to find those that were capable of providing me with the goods and services, especially my craving for lots of beef, that me and my family need to survive. This would be an incredibly complicated process without money. In the ground beef example, I would need to find a fan of the Cold War that also raises cattle. I know one. He's my father, so, that's not a good example. Well, he at least pretends to be interested in the Cold War. Now, seriously though, with money, I just work for UT, collect a paycheck, and then use that salary to buy things I need. The existence of money allows me to specialize and focus on one economic task, like educational services, rather than spending my time locating someone to trade with, or simply producing the goods I need myself, if I cannot find a trading partner. So, money is a very important part of our daily lives and the economy. Without money, we would not have the kind of sophisticated, professional and economic specialization that we have. Now that can translate a very specific skill or task or good into a medium that can then be traded for other very different goods and services. >> Can I give you another example? And think about money as the oil a, to an engine. And the, say the economy is the engine, and you take oil out and the economy can't function. It's the same thing with respect to money. If you take money out of the economy, exchange, specialization, doesn't occur. And so money is absolutely vital to the growth of -- to economic activity and economic growth. >> Right. So, now, the second use or function of money is that money is a unit of account. It provides a mechanism to measure the value of things, and compare goods and services that would otherwise be non-comparable. We can compare, for example, iPhones and cars by asking how much of each we might be able to buy for $10,000. And so, realize that money and price, the function of money is to put a price on virtually everything. And that might sound cynical, how can you put a price on everything? But an economy doesn't work without being able to say, "I will pay so" "many dollars in our economy for this particular good or service." Right? Now third, money also allows us to store value over time, and this is very important. Storing value over time through the function of money facilitates saving and investment. Both of which can help to increase economic capacity and wealth in the long run. When you get old, like me, you will realize that money is very important as a store of value when you start looking and thinking about someday I'm going to stop working and I'm going to need enough in that 401K or 403B, to live on. That function of money is a form of security. That all of us tend to rely on. So, next, how do we think about the value of money? We can think about the price of money as reflected in interest rates. And interest rates are really -- are set by the interaction of society's demand for money and the joint effort by banks and the world's central banks to influence the supply of money, and we'll be talking more about this throughout the class. So at a very basic level, interest rates are the cost of borrowing. Let me say that again. Interest rates are simply the cost of borrowing. Which is simply using someone else's money to fund some current expenditure. There are at least two important things to know about interest rates, though. As interest rates fall, as they go down, the costs of borrowing go down. This tends to stimulate economic activity and push economic growth up. So, lower interest rates tend to stimulate economic activity and increase economic growth. For example, when interest rates fall, more homes get bought and sold because the interest rate is a key determinant of whether someone's going to buy -- have a huge investment of hundreds of thousands of dollars usually over a long amount of time, 30 years fixed rate mortgage, for example. Interest rates will have a huge effect on the monthly payment that will be needed to make that investment. And so, when interest rates fall, there is a direct and significant impact on the amount of homes that get bought and sold. That means that more of every good that gets sold as a part of a house like shingles, windows, refrigerators, carpet, et cetera, also get bought and sold at an increased rate, as well. Alternatively, higher interest rates raise the costs of borrowing. Right? And they tend to slow economic activity and economic growth. So higher interest rates, less economic growth. You think twice in an atmosphere of higher interest rates, putting on -- putting an expensive dinner on your credit card at the end of the month, when your bank increases the interest rate on your credit card from 2.9% to 20%, for example. Now you should extract important policy implication from this simple equation of interest rates and economic activity. If re-election chances of politicians hinge on solid economic growth and job creation, and they do, Then politicians often want to see low interest rates. For example, President George H. W. Bush, the first President Bush, partially blamed Allan Greenspan, Federal Reserve Chairman, for his election loss in 1992. And Bush argued that a cut in interest rates before the election might have helped turn the economy around in time for him to beat Bill Clinton. But the Federal Reserve restrained themselves from cutting interest rates and the consequential lack of economic growth hurt George H. W. Bush's chance to get re-elected in 1992. >> So let me just reinforce a couple of things in Rob's discussion. So first, money facilitates trade, specialization, and economic growth by acting as a medium of exchange. Second, the price of money or financial capital is reflected in interest rates. Third, as interest rates go up, the costs of borrowing go up and economic activity or growth go down. And fourth, politicians tend to like lower interest rates, particularly in the months before elections because it stimulates economic growth. And then politicians can often claim some credit and success for their policies when they seem to be associated with economic growth. 