 Now, we want to turn slightly and begin talking about monetary policy in the United States. And this means talking about government efforts to influence interest rates, inflation, the money supply, and exchange rates. The principal bureaucratic agency responsible for these tasks in the United States is the Federal Reserve. So, we have already talked about how interest rates set the cost of financial capital and influence growth opportunities. Interest rates are influenced by predictions about what inflation will be in the future and about what the money supply will be in the future. Now inflation is a way to measure the rate at which prices for goods like cars, gas, food and housing rise. As inflation goes up, the price of these products increases as well. Inflation can obviously hurt your standard of living if you're living on a relatively fixed income because your money stays the same, but the cost of goods that you need to survive goes up. So, then you can buy less of those goods. Now, the money supply is simply the quantity of a currency, like dollars, floating around the world, and the quantity of dollar deposits in banks around the world. The money supply is influenced by a government's monetary policy. Alright, as we've talked about this, in the United States, the principal agency charged with regulating the money supply is the Federal Reserve. You can also think about the Fed, the Federal Reserve, as the central bank of the United States or the bank for big banks like Wells Fargo and Goldman Sachs. The Federal Reserve generally has three key monetary policy instruments by which to influence important monetary outcomes like the money supply, inflation, and interest rates. First, it can set reserve requirements for banks in the United States. Now, let's take a step back here for a second here to talk about banking. Banks act as intermediaries in the economy. They take deposits from their customers and then they loan out that surplus capital to people who can put it to good use by buying things like cars and houses. So, banks serve as intermediaries to move surplus capital to places where it is needed. Banks turn a profit by paying lower interest rates on those deposits than the interest rates they charge when people borrow money from banks. You think about this as the interest rate spread. The Fed though, doesn't allow banks to lend out all the deposits they take in. Banks need cash on hand in case their depositors need their money back to buy something. If depositors didn't have any confidence that their cash wouldn't be there, they would leave their cash under the mattress, and they wouldn't take their money to banks, and then banks couldn't serve as intermediary role. Then, surplus capital would not be reallocated to some more productive use then the broader economy. All of this means that the Fed sets reserve requirements for banks to try to increase confidence in the banking system. It tells banks how much cash they must have on hand, to reassure depositors that their money will be there when they need it. Most importantly, as these reserve ratios increase, private banks lend out a smaller portion of their deposits. These lower levels of new credit slow the growth of the domestic money supply. Higher reserve ratios also curtail lending, right, and slow economic growth. So in sum, the Federal Reserve influences the money supply by setting reserve ratios for banks in the United States. A second, the central bank also influences monetary outcomes by changing the interest rates it charges to banks that borrowed directly from the Federal Reserve. This is something that is generally called the discount rate. And you might think about it as applying to the biggest banks in the United States like Wells Fargo or Goldman Sachs. Most importantly, when the cost of acquiring capital for Wells Fargo go up, when Wells Fargo has to pay higher interest rates to the Fed, Wells Fargo then starts to charge their consumers higher interest rates on car loans and home loans. This means that the Fed can influence short-term interest rates in the United States by altering the interest rates that it charges the biggest banks in the United States. Now third, central banks like the Fed could also influence monetary outcomes by engaging in something called "open market operations." These are transactions in which the central bank buys and sells financial assets like bonds. For example, the Federal Reserve has been undertaking something called quantitative easing since the financial crisis began. The Fed is essentially creating new deposits for the biggest banks in the United States by buying their holdings of mortgage bonds and US Treasury bonds. The Fed is doing this to push down long-term interest rates in the United States. At the same time, though, the Fed is creating new money. These banks new deposits at the Fed, which many worry will be inflationary over the long run. Now, finally there is a dilemma here that here that harkens back to the fundamental problem of politics, when we're talking about the Federal Reserve or central bank's role in managing monetary policy outcomes. So, we need the government to issue a currency. However, once we give the government the power to create a currency, we also give governments the capacity to abuse that power. How? The government can always print more money to pay its debts when it is politically difficult for politicians to raise taxes. This is essentially what the Federal Reserve has been doing since the financial crisis first began in 2008. The problem is, though, that if the bank, or, sorry, if the central bank or governments do this continually, the money will eventually lose its value as the money supply explodes. Money in this sense becomes less scarce, or the dollar becomes less scarce. So, this leads to a larger question. How can you prevent a government from abusing this privilege and undermining the value of all the money in circulation, just so it can cover its debts? 