 So, this possibility that the government can just print all the money it wants, opens up the risk of inflation, or something called hyperinflation, to an economy. In a bit we will talk about the institutions, like an independent central bank, that helps to limit that risk, but before we do that, before we answer the question, "how can we, you know, prevent government from printing all the money" "it could possibly want?" We should define inflation, and talk briefly about why it is so bad for an economy because it addresses this idea of, if interest rates activate economic growth, why don't we always have incredibly low interest rates? So, what is inflation? Because that's the danger that were going to try to, that central bankers try to avoid in setting monetary policy, inflation is just the growth in prices. So, it's a very simple concept. Inflation is growth in prices. It is measured by the Consumer Price Index and the Producer Price Index. Now these two indices track price movements in a bundle of goods over time. So when you hear that the CPI, the Consumer Price Index, is up 2% this means that on average some bundle of goods, like a loaf of bread, gallon of gas, et cetera, that might have cost $100 in 2013, now cost $102 in 2015, right? So, high inflation is bad because it erodes the purchasing power of money. You are going to be less well off, and all consumers are going to be less well off, and they will consume less in a world in which one's income stays the same, but the prices of gas or apartment rentals, tuition, food, and all of the other goods and services that we purchase every day are all rising. So if income stays the same and prices go up, especially if they go up dramatically then that's a problem. Second, high inflation is bad because it erodes the value of creditor's key assets, mainly, long-term loans, and when you hear the term, creditors, think banks. Here's an example of how inflation can be bad for a bank. When a bank lends me money to buy a house, be a 30 year loan, they are going to get the same monthly check, let's say it's $1,000, although that's pretty low, from over the next 360 months, right? 30 years, 360 months. If their costs go up, say if they have to pay a higher wages to their mortgage brokers, my $1,000 check is going to cover fewer of those rising costs. Consequently, the financial sector, specifically institutions that lend money for the long term, have strong interest in seeing the government contain, that is keep inflation down. Contain inflation, right. Having said this though, it is important to recognize that deflation, the falling of prices, is really bad too. Now why would continually falling prices be so bad. Sounds like it would be sort of great for consumers, but just think about the situation in which you expect prices to fall. This is what happened with respect to the housing market from 2008 to 2010. If you expect housing prices to fall in three months do you buy now or do you wait three months? Most people wait, right. But if everyone waits because everyone expects prices are falling then nobody buys, right, and real economic activity slows way down. And if that happens, then prices fall even further, and people wait even longer to buy which means that economic activity slows down continually, and you get this vicious cycle, right. And so, deflation is something to avoid as well. We don't want high inflation, but we don't want chronic deflation. So the central bank generally has what they call an optimal inflation target that hovers around 2%. This is designed to appease the banks, so that the value of their assets erodes slowly, over time. It also enables banks to have stable expectations about any inflation changes. In other words, it helps them to predict inflation, so they can adjust their interest rates accordingly. Now how do central banks contain, that is control and keep inflation down? How do they contain inflation? They have one key policy tool that is oriented toward tightening or slowing down the growth of the money supply. You slow down the growth of the money supply, you should be able to contain inflation, and they, that one policy tool is interest rates. They try to raise interest rates, which then if you raise interest rates, raises the cost of borrowing and slows down economic activity. So let me say this again central banks can limit inflation by raising interest rates. Now, there is an institutional challenge to this, though. Politicians like economic growth, it gets them reelected. Remember, George H.W. Bush's frustration with Alan Greenspan for not cutting interest rates in 1992. So if politicians want cheap money, meaning low interest rate with a low percentage on borrowing money, how do you ever contain inflation? Because if you have really low interest rates, then inflation becomes a danger. More broadly you can ask, how do you solve the fundamental problem of politics with respect to monetary policy? The answer is straightforward, even though it's a little controversial. You take responsibility for making monetary policy away from elected officials, elected politicians, and give it to non-elected officials like Janet Yellen, the current Chairwoman of the Federal Reserve. By giving this responsibility to non-elected officials you insulate them from electoral pressures, they don't have to worry about getting reelected. And you enable them then to raise interest rates if they have to, to slow inflation even when such an action is really politically unpopular. They can take unpopular political action, because they don't have to get elected. 