 Let's talk about the Federal Reserve, and this will help us to talk about what the Federal Reserve did in 2008, and talk more specifically about this policy of quantitative easing. The Federal Reserve is the most important central bank in the world. It is a key source of American political and financial power, and perhaps the most important organization in getting us out of the financial crisis of 2008. The Federal Reserve is the banker to the banks. It lends them money to bail them out of trouble when no other private banks will, and this is what happens in the fall of 2008. Its principal responsibilities are to manage the nation's money supply, regulate the financial sector of the United States, promote employment, and limit inflation. Now, its function in society differs from that of a more traditional bank, like Wells Fargo, because it is tasked first with preserving the stability of the American monetary system. So, even though the Fed is making huge profits right now, well over a billion dollars a year the last time I checked, these profits are not its key goal. So earlier we identified three policy instruments of the Fed to influence monetary outcomes like inflation, reserve ratios, the discount rate or the interest rates that the Fed charges to other banks, and open market operations. I want to talk a little bit more about quantitative easing. An example of open market operations because this central banking innovation has perhaps been the most important policy tool used by our government officials to get us out of the financial crisis, and it's a policy that's been copied by Japan, and it's now being implemented in Europe as well. So under Ben Bernanke, the previous head of the Federal Reserve, our nation's central bank has been engaged in an incredibly ambitious policy of essentially printing new money. It's been using this money to buy bonds, principally bonds that are backed by home mortgages. And U.S. treasury bonds at record rates in the last five years. Since 2008, the Federal Reserve has expanded its holdings of these financial assets by nearly $4 trillion. This is amazing, and ask yourself, where did it get the money to buy these things? It essentially just created it out of thin air, giving the sellers of these assets new deposits at the Federal Reserve. Now, why has it been doing this? By increasing the demand for bonds, the Federal Reserve has been pushing up the price of these bonds. Which simultaneously helps to reduce long term interest rates in the United States. Now, we're going to show you why this is the case in a second. But most importantly, by pushing down long term interest rates through the purchase of these bonds, the Fed is trying to get businesses and individuals borrowing in long-term interest rate markets. So borrowing money for 30 years to buy a house, so consumers and businesses spend more money, and then stimulate economic growth. So now we need to take a quick detour and define bonds, and this will help us to understand this inverse relationship between the price of a bond and its yield or interest rates. Now this detour is going to help us understand the nitty gritty of these open market operations, and help us to see why bond markets as a collective can be politically powerful. First, I need you to remember a simple fact. A bond is just a loan. A bond is a loan, it is an IOU, a promise to repay a fixed amount of money in a fixed amount of time. The payments associated with bonds can take two forms. A coupon, which is just a partial interest payment, and say the principal payment that might come due at the end of the loan. Investors or creditors are the ones that buy the IOUs, and the debtors, often the US Government because it is in deficit, they're the ones that issue these IOUs. A second, there are a few key traits that we would like you to remember about bonds. The first is the price that the creditor pays the debtor to buy that IOU. So in the example on the slide, imagine a bond that will be worth 100 dollars when it matures or comes due. Now the creditor does not pay $100 for that IOU when it is issued because that would be like lending the money interest free. Your parents might do that but banks don't. Instead, the creditor buys that promissory note at a discount from its face value. So if they expected something like a return of 6% in a year. Then they might pay $94.34 cents the math is on the board there for that IOU. Note though from the fraction on the slide that the price in the interest rates of bonds, which are also called yields, they move in opposite directions. I'll say this again, prices and yields move in opposite directions. Now the price of bonds are shaped by the quality of the debt. Higher credit rating scores means less risk, lower interest rates or yields, and higher sales prices for bonds. So, in the global economy we have ratings agencies that provide scores estimating the likelihood of payment over time of these bonds. Now the mistakes of these ratings agencies when assessing the risks associated with mortgage bonds played a huge role in the financial crisis of 2008. These agencies that essentially scored a lot of really crappy debt, as if it was as good as U.S. Treasury debt. Believing these ratings then, banks, and investment houses, and pension funds bought this debt. And then took an absolute pounding when the housing market collapsed. 