 Now, we're going to move directly into talking about how the United States can extract some political leverage by issuing debt and standing at the center of international finance, right? The first thing to realize is that the markets for US Treasury bonds, and mortgage backed securities are extremely deep and liquid. When a government bond is issued, the initial creditor buys the IOU from the debtor, and receives a promise to repay the loan in, say, ten years from the government. But that initial creditor does not have to wait ten years to get paid. Instead, they play the market and sell that IOU at any time in something called secondary markets, potentially turning a profit. In this way, these bonds regularly change hands. And this ultimately reduces the risk associated with holding these bonds. In this way, US Treasury bonds act like cash around the world among banks and central banks. However, they are one step better than cash because they bear interests. They pay interests, and so they're a better investment than cash, which loses value due to inflation, right? Given the confidence in the credit of the United States, there is a stable and steady demand for US treasuries. A similar principle with a little more risk and a little more reward operates with mortgage backed securities. Two government enterprises, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, stand in the backdrop of a huge number of mortgages, at least 50% of the mortgages in the United States. When you buy a house, a bank probably issues you a conforming loan. This means that it conforms to the rules of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. The bank probably then sells your mortgage IOU to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, who then turn around, bundle these mortgages together, then break them up into little parts, and sell these little parts. These little parts might be sold as bonds back to institutional investors like banks, mutual funds, pension funds, and hedge funds. These mortgage-backed securities help diversify the risk associated with lending money to people to buy homes. Rather than having a single bank lend money to a home owner, this intermediary role by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac essentially allows scores or even hundreds of entities to loan money to a single homeowner. Now, together, these bonds, US Treasuries and mortgage backed securities, bonds who's principal form of collateral are the homes of American citizens, play a central role in global finance. They act as the most important source of reserves, or cash, for banks and central banks, all around the world. Remember when we talked about the need for banks like Wells Fargo to hold reserves in case their depositors request to have their money back, right? The same principle operates for banks around the world. Banks need to have cash on hand so their depositors believe there will be money available when they want to take their money back. The Chinese Central Bank currently holds about $3.9 trillion in reserves simply cash on hand. Now, although we don't know the exact numbers, some estimates -- some estimates suggest that about two-thirds of those holdings are in dollar denominated investments, like US Treasury bonds and mortgage-backed securities. Most importantly, this really insatiable appetite for dollars around the world creates an advantage for the United States that its citizens enjoy. This demand for US bonds allows Americans to buy lots of things on credit. For good or for ill. When it comes to public policy, it means that the US government can consistently run deficits to pay for things that the public wants but isn't really willing to pay for through higher taxes. So it's a crucial element of our politics. >> So this symbiotic relationship in which the world needs dollars, and the American public needs credit lies at the heart of something called the Triffin dilemma. As the global economy grows, it needs more of the reserved currency to function. So right now, the world needs the United States to expand its money supply. The key source of this growth in the money supply has been the program of quantitative easing by the Federal Reserve. In this way, the global economy needs the US government to issue debt. The global economy needs the US governments to run deficits, to spend more than it takes in through taxes. However, this creates a problem for the world and for the United States. The Federal Reserve has essentially been printing new dollars to pay for these loans. This gives banks new deposits that they can lend out. However, all of this money washing around will eventually turn inflationary. Now, why is that bad? Because inflation will push the value of the dollar down. Now, this is a threat to all of the countries around the world that hold dollars as reserves. Because when the value of the dollar falls, the value of their reserve holdings falls as well. Thus, you can see the dilemma. The world needs the US to issue debt. The US needs to issue debt because the public doesn't like to pay taxes. This equilibrium though, heightens the long run risk of inflation, and potentially imposes another risk to the cash that governments around the world hold, to the reserves that they hold that could drive down their value if the US government issues too much debt. So how long can this thing be sustained? It really depends on the continued willingness of key central banks and sovereign wealth funds from around the world, like those in China, Japan, South Korea, and the oil-exporting countries, to buy US Treasuries and mortgage-backed securities. As long as the demand for these bonds stays up, borrowing costs in the United States remain low, and the world gets the expansion in reserves that it needs to flourish. But, this dynamic also puts tremendous responsibility on the Fed to control the growth of money supply, so as not to risk inflation. And here's the rub for contemporary policy. There is all this extra cash that's been created in the last five years. Because growth has accelerated slowly, the inflation risk has been contained. Essentially, banks and financial intermediaries have been sitting on piles of cash, but the Fed eventually has to bring all those dollars back. That means selling a large chunk of all those bonds that the Fed bought, which will push their prices down, and bring interest rates back up. Remember, this is how you control inflation. That is by hiking interest rates. But that of course, is going to slow down the American economy. So again, you see a dilemma. The Fed is eventually going to have to raise interest rates, a process that's likely to begin in the fall, but this will slow the American economy down, and by extension potentially slow the global economy down as well. So let me say another thing about sustainability here. A form of this Triffin dilemma also creates external pressure on say, the President to quickly, and in this case, put pressure on Obama after 2008, to quickly reign in deficits that exploded over the period from 2008 to 2011 or so. For example, when Obama was negotiating Obamacare with Congress, he simultaneously had to entertain delegations from China that were worried about how Obamacare could explode the public deficit. And basically Chinese officials came to President Obama and said, "Are you sure you want to do this? Because" "we're going to have to pay for the deficit if it explodes." And here's the dilemma for China that you need to think about when asking yourself the following, what happens to United States if China ever wants to liquidate these reserves, or sell these bonds? The thing to remember is that America's budget deficit, and its debt, is China's problem now too, because they hold so much of it. If the dollar falls in value, those $4 trillion in reserves, a savings account to the Chinese government and the Chinese people, worth about 45% of total Chinese GDP, that falls in value, too. So, if China were to lose a trillion dollar in reserve, this creates a bit of a domestic problem for them. Their citizens are going to ask, "why are you lending all that money to the crazy" "Americans when you could spend the money creating jobs here in China instead?" Sound familiar? Hear about this with respect to foreign aid debates here in the United States. The point of this is to reinforce strong common interests between China and the United States when it comes to the larger international financial system. So let me offer another illustration of the security implications associated with all these dollars floating around the world. You can also think of these foreign purchases of U.S. debt as financial support for the expanded military position of the Unites States around the world in the aftermath of 9/11. Presidents Bush and Obama clearly made decisions to reduce the domestic costs of fighting long wars by giving Americans tax cuts while defense expenditures increased dramatically. Foreign willingness to lend money to the United States government helped to facilitate these expenditures. Now, big creditors like China had really opposed American actions in Iraq and Afghanistan. They could have made it a lot harder for Presidents Bush and Obama to sustain these conflicts by selling treasuries, and then driving up the borrowing costs in the United States. But they chose to follow the status quo, choosing their own domestic economic health over staunch opposition to the expansion of American military influence. 