 Let's move on and talk about exchange rates, and we can get a better understanding of the domestic incentives to fund American budget deficits by looking briefly at exchange rates, okay? So this is another economic concept that you need to be familiar with. An exchange rate simply reflects the price at which one currency can be traded for another currency. It indicates the relative value of two different currencies. So movements in currency prices have real macro-economic consequences because they change the prices of foreign goods in an economy. The example listed on the slide shows how the Dollar has appreciated relative to the Yen in the last three years. Now the term appreciated means go up. The term depreciated means go down. So the Dollar has increased in value relative to the Yen. This means that a single Dollar has seen its capacity to purchase Yen increase over that three year period. In September 2011, one Dollar bought 77 Yen. In the fall of 2014, that same Dollar could buy 150 Yen. These changes in the relative value of currencies also mean that the Yen has depreciated relative to the Dollar over that same period. A Yen buys a smaller proportion of Dollars in 2014 than it did in 2011. Exchange rate movements are a function of two key variables. Interest rates and expectations about a currency's value in the future. This latter factor can include a whole host of things, like future interest rate differentials between two economies, future inflation differentials because they shape expectations about interest rate changes and budget changes. When interest rates go up, the value of the currency goes up. Alternatively, when interest rates go down, the currency depreciates relative to other currencies, that's value goes down. The logic is relatively state -- straightforward. Interest rates are an indicator of the returns that can be generated by holding an asset denominated in some currency. So when interest rates go down, the returns to an asset goes down, and investors sell it. When investors sell an asset that's denominated, that's priced in a currency, that sale helps to push the value of the currency down. The movement in the value of the Yen over the past three years is partly due to their program of quantitative easing. The Japanese Central Bank has also tried to stimulate economic growth by doing what Ben Bernanke did in the aftermath of the 2008 crisis in the United States. This meant buying Japanese bonds to push their price up and their interest rate down. But as interest rates fell in Japan, the Yen fell as well. Exchange rates have real macro-economic consequences, because they change the relative price of conducting international transactions. Now the slide gives you a hypothetical example of how the price of imports from Japan inside the United States have fallen dramatically over the past several years. Now I use the CRV, the vehicle, CRV, out of Honda because a long time ago that was the only Honda vehicle completely manufactured in Japan. So let's say the price of the CRV to some Honda dealer in Texas, is 1.5 million Yen in 2011. Now to make that purchase, the Honda dealer has to go to its bank and use Dollars here in the United States to buy Yen. So then it has Yen to pay Honda for the CRV. The Honda dealer needs $20,000 in cash, in Dollars, to buy a sufficient amount of Yen, so it can buy the Honda CRV from Honda to sell to its customers. Now what happens, though, when the Dollar appreciates, meaning goes up, relative to the Yen over a three year window? Because Honda pays its workers in Yen, it still wants Yen. It won't take Dollars. So let's imagine that prices have remained constant for the Honda CRV at 1.5 million Yen. Because the Dollar has appreciated, right, gone up relative to the Yen, the Honda dealer can buy those Yen with fewer Dollars. In fact, those Yen cost now not $20,000, but $13,400 in November of 2014. This is a huge difference, right? And it tells a significant story about the political incentives to manipulate exchange rates, right? By pushing the value of the Dollar up, this Chinese Central Bank -- is Japanese, sorry -- The Japanese Central Bank is making Japanese products in the United States cheaper for the American consumer. This should then increase American imports from Japan, and this should all sound somewhat familiar because this is the charge that's usually made against China. >> Yeah, so now let's talk about China. These incentives to manipulate exchange rates have been a critical part of US-China relations over the past decade. The Chinese Central Bank and its central government has long sought to push the Dollar up relative to the Chinese currency, the RMB, to strengthen the purchasing power of the American consumer. By helping to prop up the Dollar, the Chinese government can then promote exports and job growth in cities -- in China -- it depends on this export creation to the United States. So now we can start to bring everything full circle. How does the Chinese government push the value of the Dollar up? By buying financial assets that are denominated in Dollars. These purchases increase the demand for Dollars and you know what assets they buy. U.S. treasuries and mortgage backed securities. In this way, the Chinese government helps to keep interest rates low in the United States, both for a government that is unwilling to hike taxes on its citizens and for the average American home owner. Now do you see why we started the lecture with suggesting that your long term desire to own a house might depend on what is going on in China? Unless you plan on paying for that house with cash, your monthly mortgage payment might be influenced by whether or not the Chinese Central Bank is still holding tons of US debt in five to ten years. As of now I think you are pretty safe. Why? Because this is a mutually beneficial relationship. The US gets cheaper credit and cheaper imports, and the Chinese government gets export-led growth, which helps to stabilize the political system there. 