 Finally, we now want to return to where we started as well and another dimension. Why was Bill Clinton complaining about the bond markets? Generally, when governments borrow money, they don't go to banks. Instead, they auction off small pieces of their debt as bonds. The continual need to secure credit because of deficits, though, gives bond markets a powerful say in a government's economic policy. If bond markets don't like the economic policies of a government, for example, they might think that the government is not doing enough to control inflation or rein in the budget deficit, bond traders can simply choose to sell off the bonds of that government. These sales push the value of the bond down, and push the interest rates that a government will have to pay to borrow new money, up. In short, bond markets can make deficits less sustainable by forcing governments to pay higher interest rates. Now the power of bond markets to punish governments in this way has grown significantly over the past 30 years or so. This power stems from something called "global capital mobility." Since the mid-1970s, governments have progressively eliminated restrictions on moving financial capital around the world into different currencies. Now governments did this for competitive reasons. If they limited a capital holder's capacity to withdraw their assets from their economy, say through some form of a tax, that capital holder would have been deterred from investing in that economy in the first place, and so they never would have invested. But initiated in part by the elimination of capital controls inside the United States in the 1970s, other governments did the same. They were worried about all the global surplus of capital going to the United States, so to remain competitive, they had to cut regulatory burdens on capital holders inside their domestic economies. So the net result of this race to the bottom or the elimination of regulations on the movement of capital, is that there's a relatively costless, that it -- sorry -- that it's relatively costless, basically a small brokerage fee to sell a bond issued by the Greek government and trade it for a bond issued by the American government. This is important. It's relatively costless to take a holding in the Greek government debt and change it into a holding into the American government debt. This means that when bond markets lose confidence in a government's economic policy, they can punish that government by selling its bonds and driving up its costs for borrowing more money. Right? These sales, though, drive the value of that currency down, and can dramatically raise the cost of imports for that country. This downward pressure is an even larger problem for countries in a fixed exchange rate regime like the Eurozone. They are legally required to preserve the value of their currency. This means that governments in Europe needed to take steps to bring foreign investors back, so they would stop selling those government bonds. And how did they do that? They raised interest rates, they raised taxes, they cut government spending, and they put people out of work. Rright. All of these measures that were necessary to reassure bond investors, depressed domestic economic activity in Europe and put people out of work. And look at what's happened in the Eurozone over the past five years. Unemployment rates in Greece and Spain are well over 20%, and these governments -- because these government have had to adopt such policies to try to protect the value of their government debt. So why did Bill Clinton and James Carville hate the bond markets? Because bond markets can be powerful disciplining agents on a country's economic policy, dramatically reducing policy options in an economic crisis. And this possibility raises larger questions about the sustainability of democracy in an era of globalization that we're going to discuss in the last session of this class. Is a country really democratic if bankers operating in international bond markets have the capacity to set a government's economic policy, rather than its elected leaders? 