 The United States led the effort to create a series of international organizations that were designed to maintain open global markets after World War II The beginnings of these organizations were prepared at the Bretton Wood Meetings in New Hampshire in 1944. So, World War II was still going on. And the post-war planners are already starting to think about how are we gonna structure the global economy to ensure that we don't have another Great Depression and another World War II. Now these meetings in 1944 would ultimately lead to the creation of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, or the GATT, that would later become the World Trade Organization. They would also lead to the creation of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development that would later become the World Bank. And they would foster the creation of the International Monetary Fund, which we're gonna focus on in this segment. So, leaders at the time in 1944 believed that the collapse of the global economy during the Great Depression had played a large role in giving rise to the Nazi party in Germany, and its violent attempts to remake the larger world order. As a consequence, they sought to prevent another Great Depression and war by creating a global economic order that would maintain open trading relations and help to rebuild Europe after World War II. The United States sought to maintain open markets by adopting free trade policies on its own after 1945, something that was facilitated by the Reciprocal Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in 1934 that we've already discussed. The experience of the Great Depression had also taught policymakers another lesson about the challenges associated with generating lots of international trade. While trade patterns can be interrupted through tariff hikes, like what the United States did with the Smoot-Hawley tariff in 1929, global trade patterns could also be grossly disrupted through currency wars. When governments intentionally devalue their currency, to make imports more expensive, and exports cheaper. So, the International Fund, Monetary Fund was created in part to try and stabilize int, international currency markets and prevent these currency wars. Okay, so what does the IMF do and how does it help to stabilize the international monetary system? The fund acts like a bank. It oversees a pool of capital that has been given to it by its member countries. It was initially created as a device to solve the money problem for the global economy, right. And the global economy needs a stable currency, it needs a money, means of exchange to facilitate trade. So the IMF was first charged with creating a currency labeled special drawing rights to meet this need. However, in practice, this function quickly fell to the US dollar, and it quickly remains the key reserve currency in the world. So the international means of exchange is still about the US dollar. Second, the International Monetary Fund was created to try and prevent large movements in exchange rates. This is what we just talked about with respect to keeping stable exchange rates, preventing currency wars. Go back a couple of classes and you can see the importance of stable exchange rates with facilitating international trade. We talked about how the Japanese yen has fallen over 50% relative to the dollar, since 2011. Now this has made Japanese exports to the United States a lot cheaper. And it has made American exports to Japan much more expensive. So, in this way, international currency devaluation, or rapid and large shifts in currency prices can hurt industries located in trading partners and generate trade wars and a lot of tension in international economic relations. So about three or four years ago these dynamics shaped American frustrations with China over its efforts to keep its currency low. Which was hurting American firms that were trying to capture new market share in China. The point of this discussion is to illustrate that international trade is often facilitated through exchange rate stability. This is one of the principal reasons why Europe has a common currency, the euro. You can eliminate exchange rate risk and it's disruptive effects on trade by simply eliminating currencies. So, how was the IMF tasked with fulfilling this responsibility? Until the early 1970s, member countries of the IMF needed to get approval from the IMF before allowing large movements, price movements in their currency. The IMF has also traditionally helped governments stabilize their currency with emergency loans in the midst of an economic crisis. So in this way, the IMF can act like a lender of last resort. When the banks and government of a country cannot borrow in private capital markets, governments go to the IMF. Now, the IMF continues to play this role in the current global economy. It has extended loans to European governments during the euro crisis. Now typically the IMF uses its pool of capital when a member country faces something called a balance of payments crisis. Now this happens when the country as a whole cannot make its loan payments to lenders outside of the country. It needs to secure dollars to make these loan payments, but is unable to. Seeing these financial difficulties, investors will pull their capital out of the country because they're worried about whether there's gonna be enough dollars for them to get paid. When they pull their assets out of the country, they do this by selling financial assets denominated in that currency. Say stocks and government issued bonds. But these sales, investors pulling their capital out of the country in a currency cris, crisis, puts even more downward pressure on stock markets, bond markets, and the currency. All of which obviously make it more difficult for the country then to raise the capital it needs to make its loan payments or renegotiate these loans. So, in this state of economic crisis or financial crisis, the governments of these countries typically appeal to the International Monetary Fund for emergency loan. The IMF often steps in and grants such a loan. However, it does so with strict terms, often called conditionality arrangements. These conditions are designed to stabilize the country's finances and ensure its long term ability to pay its debts to international creditors. The IMF enforces these arrangements by dispersing the loans that it promises to these countries in partial payments. It then gives the countries a series of reforms, or directives, that must be implemented to receive further disbursements. Now the domestic political costs of these conditions are often severe, because they impose real economic pain on a country. For example, the IMF will often insist on things like trade liberalization, which is cutting tariff barriers, or capital market liberalization, which might be eliminating capital controls. So, this might mean, as I said, cutting tariffs or allowing foreign investors to take majority-owning stake in key domestic firms. But remember the purpose of these regulations. These economic regulations, reg, regulations, like tariffs, are capital controls help insulate domestic firms from international competition. So, the elimination of these regulations exposes these firms to more global competition and often puts them out of business. Now, the IMF also often insists on severe fiscal austerity, pushing the government to raise taxes and cut its own spending. Now obviously tax hikes take money out of citizen's pockets, which hurts economic growth. Same thing happens with spending cuts. When governments cut spending, people get laid off, they lose their job. So, in short these conditionality arrangements often impose real economic pain on a country. So then why do countries agree to such harsh terms? Because the IMF in a crisis, because the IMF is often the only game in town, or the only remaining player that will help to get them a bailout that might alleviate the crisis. So countries are in trouble in these situations, because private capital markets are unwilling to lend more money to them. This lender of last resort function, though augments the power of the International Monetary Fund. A country often cannot get access to private capital from international banks after they've experienced a crisis, until the IMF signs off on a program of economic reform. So in this way the IMF, once a country gets into a crisis, the IMF then acts as an important gatekeeper for the developing world. Potentially enforcing limited access to capital markets until they get their financial houses in order. So, think about the sequence here. A country gets into a crisis, they can't get money from private capital markets, they have to go to the IMF. The IMF has power to impose real tough conditions on them. And the government, if they don't impose these conditions, they don't get money to the, from the IMF, but then moreover, they can't get money from private capital markets as well. All of this gives the IMF a lot of power to reshape domestic policies and domestic politics in developing countries. Okay. So what does the United States have to do with all this and the power of the IMF? It's important to remember that all countries are not equal within the IMF. Instead, voting power and political influence reflects how much capital a country has given to the total pool of capital overseen by the IMF. As you might have guessed, the US is the largest donor to the International Monetary Fund, and thus possesses significant influence over the process by which a conditionality arrangement might be negotiated with a country. Now the IMF and the United States came under a lot of criticism for their roles in shaping the response to a series of financial crises in the 1990s, the most important of which was the Asian financial crisis that later spread to Russia and Latin America. Critics argue that the IMF in the 1990s, was essentially doing Wall Street's bidding. Pressuring countries to open up their capital markets before they were ready. Remember, we talked about the power of the bond markets in the previous class sessions. These tough or disciplining bond markets can raise the borrowing cost to a government and hurt its currency by simply removing their capital from the economy. Now capital holders, or bond holders, couldn't do this in the 1950s and the 1960s because governments imposed capital controls that effectively made these transactions. So, the sale of a Greek government bond by an American investor, there were capital controls in the 50s and the 60s that essentially made this transaction illegal. However, the elimination of these capital controls throughout much of the developing world has made them vulnerable to rapid and often violent shifts in capital in and out of countries. Which then raises their borrowing costs, drives down the value of their currencies, and gives bond markets and the IMF more influence over these governments' economic policies. So now, remember, we are talking about the United States, and the US and the IMF, why would these reforms where the IMF insists on capital market liberalization. Why would these reforms help Wall Street? Because when it comes to delivering financial services, Wall Street is extremely efficient. U.S. banks in the 1990s sought new market access to countries that were opening up in the aftermath of the Cold War. And they saw new market opportunities because they could effectively root out domestic financial services that were much less competitive. It is important to note, though, that the US has often showed flexibility in these conditionality arrangements. When it fits its own interests, particularly its strategic interests. Research has shown that countries participating in loan programs with the IMF can often have the implementation of these conditions relaxed, or delayed, when they are critical US allies. For example, the U.S. has often intervened on behalf of Pakistan in its negotiations with the IMF. 