 ﻿1 We're gonna spend a few minutes talking about that 2008 economic crisis. And this is an important event in all of your lives. I think that, you, it touched you whether you were cognizant of it or not. In terms of how it affects, even to this day, your employment prospects, it might have affected your family, if, if anybody was laid off during this crucial time. But I think it's hard to overestimate the severity of the financial crisis in the fall of 2008. The world really stood at the brink of disaster. The potential onset of a new Great Depression. Yes. Things got really bad. Unemployment eventually pushed up to 10%. The stock market as measured by the DOW Jones Industrial Average shared about half of its value. I still remember it like it was yesterday. Very frightening. But the US has largely recovered from this disaster. Unemployment is back around 5.5%, which is historically you know, normal. The stock market is just off all-time highs, and the housing market has recovered in most regions. These developments create a number of questions that we are gonna examine briefly. What started the crisis back in 2008? How did the U.S. get out of it? And what are the lasting international political consequences of this dramatic crisis? Now we're gonna do something new today, we are going to examine these questions in a quasi-interview, in which I'm gonna ask Professor McDonald, he makes me say that in this little interview with a few questions. So Professor McDonald. >> Professor Moser. >> Yes. Why did this crisis start? >> So, I think the first thing to realize this crisis started in the United States. The U.S. was at fault in the generation of the crisis. And the origins of the crisis were linked critically to the housing market in the United States. And a financial system that had been, become completely dependent on bonds that were tied to homes. And so, let's talk briefly about what's a mortgage-backed security. And if we think about the intermediation here. So, when you buy a house, You get a loan from say Wells Fargo. Wells Fargo is not going to hold onto that note, that note for 30 years. You're gonna have a 30 year obligation there. You're gonna make monthly payments every month for the next 30 years. But what Wells Fargo does is, they take that loan that IOU from you. And then, they sell it to Fannie Mae, or Freddie Mac. These huge government enterprises. What Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac, then do is, they might hold on to these bonds, or they might bundle them together with a bunch or mortgages, say, in California, Washington, Oregon, Minnesota and New York. Banks in the 2000s, basically from about 2000 to 2006 or 7 in the United States, became incredibly dependent on the purchase, sale, creation, engineering of these mortgage backed securities to generate their profits. And you could think about the profits here in terms of the difference in the spread between mortgage backed securities and government issued bonds. Government issued bonds might have been paying 2 or 3% but these mortgage backed securities were paying 6% and all the credit ratings agencies said that the ones paying 6% were completely risk free. So you have an enormal appetite. Everyone's consuming these mortgage backed bonds and the problem was though that the value of these bonds were tied intimately to the underlying asset that served as their collateral, which was American homes. So the price of these bonds and everything was fine in the financial system was fine, as long as the price of homes continued to appreciate in the United States, which had been occurring in the decade prior to 2006. But there's an old supply and demand story here, in that the housing market generated too much supply. And we saw this first in hot housing markets in Florida and California and Las Vegas. Too much supply, not enough consumers. And, moreover, the prices had exploded. So, beginning in 2006, there begins to be a correction in housing prices. Prices start to fall, but when prices start to fall in houses that means that all of the financial assets that were dependent on houses as collateral, their prices begin to fall as well. And so what then happens beginning in 2006 and 2007, all these banks, the big investment banks in the United States, that had grown so dependent On these mortgage backed securities, they start to face huge losses on their bond books that are tied to mortgage backed securities. And all of a sudden they have problems raising capital. And this happens in, in the spring of 2008. And their stock prices started going down. And most importantly, in, in 2008, when banks start to sniff that, yes, I have problems, because I've got too many of these bad loans on my books. But I also know if I'm Bear Stearns and I need to borrow, and I need a bunch of money, I need Goldman Sachs to repay a bunch of money to me, but Goldman Sachs has also got a bunch of bad mort, bad mortgage loans on the books. I now start to doubt whether Goldman Sachs is gonna pay me back. And so in the fall of 2008, you get this massive crisis of confidence because banks have so many bad loans on their books, and they realize that everybody else did, they stopped lending to each other. And when banks stop lending to each other, they stop lending to me and you. And you get you get a collapse in the financial sector. The one final thing I wanna talk about here with respect to regulation is the, the Bush administration, there was an ideological predisposition, and I shouldn't say it's not just within the Bush administration because these reforms were implemented under the Clinton administration. But within the regulatory arms of the US government that were responsible for monitoring the banking sector. And in the Federal Reserve, there was an ideological belief that the government didn't need to regulate banks in these new financial practices, in these new financial engineering because banks had a tremendous incentive to regulate themselves. And there's a famous quote from Alan Greenspan, the former head of the Federal Reserve, by saying basically, he was called to testify before Congress. He said I was wrong, I expected they had such strong financial incentives to regulate themselves because they didn't wanna lose tons of money. And, and he said, I was wrong, we needed to have begular, better regulation in place because banks were missing how leveraged they had become and we missed how leveraged the entire system had become. >> Okay so, there was a rather immediate and quick economic crisis based on these bad loans linked to the housing market. So what does the US do once the bottom falls out? How did the US respond to the crisis in the fall of 2008? >> So, the, the first thing to realize here is that over the course of 2008, the US government responds inconsistently, and it doesn't get, we don't get a really consistent response until you get the collapse in late September 2008. And it's this initial response that's inconsistent that creates uncertainty among private actors, and complicates the dynamics. So initially, the, the first real big sniffs of major problems occurred in March of 2008, when Bear Stearns is going out of business. The government engineers a takeover by JP Morgan Chase of Bear Stearns, and the implication from these actions in March of 2008 was if another bank got into trouble that the US government would then engineer an orderly takeover to protect the larger stability of the system. When we get to September 2008 and we have a series of financial institutions that have problems again. Lehman, the big investment bank is facing huge problems, they don't have enough cash, they go bankrupt in September of 2008, and the government basically says, we're gonna let them go, they made a lot of bad decisions. When the government lets Lehman go, the fourth largest investment bank in the United States, it creates panic. Because the expectation was that the US government would bail out banks like they had done in March. And so now, now everyone says, if Lehman's not safe then nobody else is safe. Lehman's bankruptcy creates a crisis in financial markets, because everybody had loaned money to Lehman, and all of a sudden they can't get their money back. And all of a sudden Goldman Sach, banks in London, they can't get their money back from Lehman and now they've got new losses on their balance sheets. This is what leads to the collapse of AIG because AIG had ensured all of these bonds that Lehman, Goldman Sachs, JP Morgan Chase, and Merrill Lynch were holding. So as the price of these bond collapses, the amount of money that AIG owes everybody else to make good on these insurance payments explode. So the government in the week after that Lehman collapses in September of 2008, they look at AIG and they say, oh, woah. A lot worse than that because AIG owes everyone billions of dollars. And they realize that if they don't bail out AIG then the entire financial infrastructure, not only in the United States, but in the UK and Europe are going under as well because AIG has promised to cover the losses of everybody else. So then the government steps in and bails out AIG after it let's Bear's, after it let's Lehman collapse and now all of a sudden everybody is like what the hell is going on. What's government policy here? They don't know what they're doing. By letting some banks fail, and, and propping some up, it creates tremendous uncertainty, and this is where you get the panic in September of 2008. Now what has the government tried to do to stabilize everything, eventually the government has to go to Congress, scares the hell out of Congress and say, you either give us $700 billion right now to bail out the banks, or the whole financial system is going under like it did in 1931. They scare Congress, and, and Congress ponies up the money, but not before initially blinking and then seeing the stock market go down 800 points after Congress initially vetoes the decision or the request for $700 billion. Congress then ponies up the money, and, and they get it. What the US government done then does is take this bail out money and directly inject cash in the banks. The US government effectively nationalized the banks in 2008 and 2009. The government brings the, the, the CEOs of the ten largest banks in the United States and says, here's what gonna happen. You guys have, you don't have enough cash on hand, you're gonna take this money from us at fairly good terms, I think the long-term for like 5%, but we're gonna get an ownership stake in your company because we don't want you to do this again. >> So, they bail out the banks. >> Mm-hm. >> Of course this is a classic moral hazard problem. Right. So, why bail out these banks when they know that, you know, this could lead to further crisis because it will just make them risky. Again, and what exactly does it mean to bail out the banks. I mean, effectively on the ground, what does it mean. >> So effectively, what happened is these banks got huge capital infusions from the US government. >> From taxpayers. >> From taxpayers. And the other thing that's really important here is the Federal Reserve bought their crappy debt off their balance sheets. So they were allowed to sell these mortgage backed securities that were clearly worth less than face value to the Federal Reserve at face value and that was designed to clean up their balance sheets, so they could hopefully ultimately go ahead and start lending to the American consumer again. So why does the US government do this? Because by late September 2008 they're worried that if they don't bail out the biggest banks then the entire American economy will go under and the best example that I can give you of this is General Electric, which 15 years ago in terms of market capitalization was the biggest firm in the world. But GE, but GE had a financial arm, GE Capital, who's taking huge losses because he can't borrow money in September of 2008 because the entire financial system has frozen up. Banks aren't lending to each other and financial institutions aren't lending to each other. But because GE Capital can't raise money and it's seeing massive losses, in September of 2008, it threatened to bring down all of General Electric. And this is what scares the government, because this became a transmission mechanism whereby a crisis It first starts in the housing sector then goes to the financial sector, spreads to the entire industrial section because all the sudden it brings down companies like GE, and companies like Microsoft, and Ford and General Motors. They can't borrow because the financial, because financial markets have simply stopped. Lending. So the government doesn't wanna do this because they recognize this is incentivizing or rewarding bad behavior but they don't have any choices because they believed that the entire economy was gonna go underneath without engineering this bill. >> This is the lesser of two evils. >> Yes, absolutely. >> And so the economic reasons for this is to say this is the. >> You have to bail out the people that caused the problems and save the system. >> Mm-hm. >> Too big to fail on that. What about the political problems then with engineering the bail out. >> So this is, these political problems help to generate Congress' stuttering response in September of 2008. So Hank Paulson, who's the Secretary of Treasury After Lehman goes under and it becomes clear that Congress, that Congress is gonna have to pay more money. They're gonna have to pony up more money to bail out the banks. He goes to Congress, and in the words of I think Nancy Pelosi and Barney Frank, they scared the hell out of us. And congressional officials after this, they tell Hank Paulson, thanks for being straight with us, we understand that you need the $700 billion to save the American economy, but I can't vote for your plan. Why? Because I'm coming up for re-election. In a couple of months, and I can't explain to my constituency why a bunch of bankers who are making tens of millions of dollars a year screwed up so bad that their bank is going under and they're driving down the rest of the American economy with it. They don't deserve a bailout. I can't explain that to my constituency so I can't vote for your plan. And so we have in this case a situation in which the politics, even though politicians could agree this was the lesser of two evils and something had to be done, it was very difficult for them to cast the tough political vote because they had their own election incentives. They couldn't explain it to their American public. To their constituency. >> So finally, after, so we're back right? >> Yeah. >> Everything came back. What's the legacy of the crisis? >> So there's been a debate that's kind of slowly emerging, say in foreign affairs and in academic journals. And I think and even among media outlets and the conventional wisdom is that this crisis sped up the transition between China and the United States. China emerged post 2008 because they recovered much quickly from the crisis then say the United States then it definitely, excuse me much quicker than Europe did. I think, and here we're in the realm of my opinion, those views should be, we should treat those views cautiously. And we can do, we should do this by comparing how the United States has recovered relative to how Europe has recovered. So, yes it was messy in the fall of 2008 and 2009 in terms of the politics of this and con, and Washington's belated response and inability to see the problem in the first place. But, the fact of the matter is we had emergency action taken by the Federal Reserve when Congress was slow to react. And the Federal Reserve has been very aggressive in countering and helping to to prop up the American economy in the immediate aftermath of the crisis. This is in, and it's played, the policies of quantitative easing have played a critical role in expanding economic growth in the United States and expanding employment in the last 4 or 5 years. And so, the point of this is, yes it was messy, yes this was a calamity. Yes, the government needs to adopt new regulations to control or stabilize financial engineering. But the fact of the matter is the system recovered, the institutions in the United States facilitated this recovery and the United States is much further along in this process than Europe is. And finally the rest of the world still looked to American leadership to get us out of this economic crisis and the American government managed to provide that in 2008 and 2009. 