 The last module talked generally about the role played by organized violence, principally war in the establishment of a political order. In this module we want to think about the political consequences of certain a class of wars, namely large wars in which the most powerful states in the system, or great powers, fight each other. These wars and their peace settlements create the structure that shapes how states interact with each other. They help to define the political order among states. For example, they define membership in the system by sanctioning the entry of new states or by destroying old ones. They also foster rules, like self-determination in organizations like the United Nations that shape how states will subsequently interact with each other in the post war period. In the 20th century, the United States has played a central role in determining the outcomes of these settlements, the most important being in 1919, 1945, and 1990 or 1991 depending on how you date the end of the Cold War. And as a consequence, the United States has perhaps played the largest role of any state in determining the larger structure of international politics during the 20th century. In some, this module will discuss how great powers like the United States, influence other states by establishing the rules of the road, so to speak, in international politics. It will be comprised of five lecture segments. The first provides an overview of this topic and is oriented around a set of questions. How do great powers influence international politics? And how did the United States influence the settlements of 1919 and 1945. The second segment examines the cold war as a great power conflict and discusses how the manner in which it ended continues to influence contemporary U.S.- Russian relations. The third segment rethinks the first two a bit by discussing the sources for the long period of great power peace that we now find ourselves in, one that has existed since 1945. If great power war has traditionally been one of the main sources of international and political change, a new era of sustainable peace among the great powers might mean that the international structure that has existed since the end of World War II, might endure as well. Together these possibilities suggest that America's position of power and influence over international politics could be sustained indefinitely. Remember this possibility when we discussed debates about America's decline in the last few modules of this course. In the fourth segment we discuss the reading by Stent and in the fifth segment we have an interview with former U.S. Ambassador to Russia,Michael McFaul, who discusses contemporary relations between the United States and Russia. 