 Today represents the first of a couple of lectures on great power politics. Our content follows from the discussion of war in the last session in an important way. Great powers, or the largest states in international politics in terms of military and economic power, have long held a disproportionate amount of influence in the international system. This position of influence though, rests on the consequences of long and bloody world wars that have remade the larger structure of international politics. These long wars alter the internal composition of states, create new states, and lead to the death of some states. And think back here to the discussion about the American Revolution, and how war makes the state. When great powers sit down to negotiate these peace settlements that end these wars, the terms of these bargains reverberate decades forward because they shape political organizations and the dominant forms that they take in the subsequent international settlement. Now these great power settlements are not just limited to halting the military contest. Instead, they transform this larger structure. By, as I said, determining political organizations that will exist in the future and setting the rules of the road, or expectations that will guide how these new political organizations and existing states will interact with each other. In this way, the consequences of war are really important for shaping the quality of the resulting peace among states. And it means even more so that international politics is nested within the consequences of organized violence. War makes the state, and war constructs the pattern of relations that constitute a political order among states. So when I talk about how international politics is structured by the consequences of a few big wars, the examples that I use to illustrate this claim will really be four. The 20 plus years of war prompted by the French Revolution, World War I, World War II and the Cold War. Now as a sidebar, when I refer to structure, interna, an international political structure, I am referring to the agents, or the political organizations in the system. Which are generally states, empires, and international organizations, like the United Nations or the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, NATO. So I'm referring to political organizations and I'm referring to the rules that guide the inner actions among these political organizations. So we think structure, think agents, and think rules that guide how the agents interact with each other. These rules could be things like sovereignty. They could be treaties that limit the size of armies or nuclear weapons stockpiles. Or say the broad norm of trade liberalization that has guided economic interactions among states since the end of World War II. >> Okay so what are some of the ways in which great power wars and their settlements influence the subsequent structure of international politics. First, these big wars or conflicts often define political membership in the international system. They help to determine which political entities will be recognized as sovereign and independent, and which will not. For example, the settlement of 1919 created a series of new states in Eastern and Southeastern Europe that had previously been part of the Russian, German, and Austro-Hungarian empires. >> Can I stop you for a second? Sorry that there, I apologize. There was a technical glitch on loading the slides. The correct slides have now been uploaded. >> Anything else? >> Nope, that's it. >> You're killing me man. All right, so similarly the collapse of the Soviet Union, see you picked the right one before that, in 1991 gave birth to another wave of new states in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia. This determination of statehood is so important in international politics because of the growing importance of the norms associated with sovereignty. Which creates expectations that external powers will respect the territorial boundaries of another state and not interfere in its domestic politics. For example, Russia's intervention in Ukraine has generated such a backlash because his actions have violated these norms of sovereignty. These norms create expectations about how other countries will act and what is morally permissible or required when one state interacts with another. This possession of legal independence and sovereignty can be an important source of authority both internally and externally. When a group of states such as United States, Great Britain, and France recognize a new state like Czechoslovakia after World War I, they helped to legitimate the authority of its government and thus empower it. Going back to the Ukrainian case, Vladimir Putin has been trying to legitimate some new government of Eastern, Eastern Ukraine by declaring that it is a modern descendant of something called New Russia. The second. Great powers also use these settlements to shape the distribution of regime type in states in the world. For example, since World War I, the United States had steadily enhanced its support for democracy. Woodrow Wilson did this by championing self-determination. The United States did this after World War II by rebuilding Germany and Japan and then, preventing the expansion of Communism in Western Europe through Marshall Plan aid. The United States and Europe together did this after the Cold War by using membership in NATO and the European Union to create incentives to consolidate. Democracy in the newly independent states that had aligned, or been part of, the Soviet Union. Similarly, the Soviet Union installed a series of autocratic Communist regimes in eastern Europe after World War II to ensure that these new buffer states would be led by friendly regimes interested in preserving these new alliance ties. Third, these settlements also shape the subsequent order by influencing the distribution of military among states, and as a consequence, their willingness to abide by the new status quo. So, for example, the victors in World War I imposed reparations and restrictions on the size of the German military, but components of the Versailles Treaty were designed to limit the ability of Germany to use military force to revise the political status quo in Europe. Hitler sought to overturn these constraints after he seized power, defaulting on the financial obligations and initiating a massive program of rearmament so he could use military threats and war to overthrow the Versailles system. Fourth, the settlements of 1919 and 1945 also saw am, ambitious attempts to construct a set of new collective security organizations that could enforce the status quo and penalize attempts to overturn it. This was the motivation behind the League of Nations. In the 1945 settlement, we see the origins of the United Nations and NATO. There really weren't new institutions created after 1990, but existing ones were expanded by incorporating new members, particularly and most importantly, in Eastern Europe with NATO expansion. Fifth, these settlements also reset the division of territory among great powers in the system. In a sense, they help to define property rights over territory. This redistribution of property rights then helps to set the political interests of the great powers with respect to this new order, or the status quo. If all the key members of the system are content with the status quo, then it is likely to endure for a long time. Alternatively, if the states hold differing interests with respect to this territorial division, some groups want it revised while some groups want it preserved, then it can be more difficult to sustain. We can think of Putin's actions in Ukraine as a partial response to extreme dissatisfaction with the territorial order that emerges after the end of the Cold War. Russia lost a series of buffer states and its influence in Eastern Europe, and it lost a lot of territory from within the Soviet Union. So Putin's efforts in Ukraine can be seen as trying to revise this status quo and return the settlement to something that in, was intact before 1991. >> Okay, so this section has argued that the settlements that end the big wars helped to structure international politics. Because the United States has been a key player in each of these important settlements of the 20th century, it has subsequently played a huge role in defining global politics. I briefly here just want to recount some of these ways in which American foreign policy has helped to define this global political structure. Woodrow Wilson played a large role in the 1919 settlement, obviously. His ideas motivated an attempt to create a fundamentally different international order. He championed self-determination, the idea that people should be able to determine their own political fate, which meant setting up their own institutions of governance. This helped spur independence movements in a number of empires around the world, and made imperial orders increasingly unsustainable. In part, this movement toward self-determination strengthened the viability of nationalism as a mobilizing force for collective action that then hoped to foster its resistance to local imperial rule. Say in, in Africa from 1919 on, these pressures gave rise to a steady increase in the number of independent states in the international system. Second, while we haven't discussed it yet, Wilson also helped to spawn new support for democracy promotion by the United States. This is going to be the focus of an upcoming lecture, and it's this goal that has really helped to define American grand strategy since then. Third, the United States has also helped to create a precedent for the creation of international organizations, like the League of Nations and the United Nations, that are capable or designed to provoke cooperation among states in the face of challenges to the existing international order. So, let's talk a little bit more about an example and this is the 1945 period. It's important realize that FDR and Churchill, when they essentially laid out the western alliances war aims in the summer of 1941 with the Atlantic Charter, adopted many of the same principles and goals that Wilson had pushed, back in 1919. In this way, Wilson's ideas helped to define the rules of the game, or the rules of the road as I referred to earlier, for future peace settlements, and we can see the legacy of his ideas clearly in American foreign policy today as well. Like Wilson, Truman and FDR both sought to strengthen democracy against Communism and the, the potential for Fascism re-emerging around the world. They also fought, fostered democracy in Germany and Japan through expansive nation building efforts. These new institutions in Germany and Japan, democratic institutions, were also protected by incorporating Germany and Japan into the American security umbrella through alliance system, and as Rob mentioned in his epic Cold War lecture. >> Marshall Plan aid was designed specifically to thwart the advance that local communist parties were making in Italy and France after World War II, when military victory was followed quickly by severe economic crisis. The United States worried then that the absence of a robust economic recovery would tilt the citizens of these countries to support communism, and a potential alliance with the Soviet Union. In this way, Marshall Plain aid was designed to foster democracy in its recipients. In direct opposition to World War I, the post-World War II settlement yielded a formal security commitment to many countries in Western Europe from the United States. Truman understood that the American withdrawal from European politics, in the interwar period, after World War I, had helped to create a political vacuum that Hitler then feel, filled in 1933. After 1945, the United States built an extensive military alliance through NATO to ensure that a repeat of the interwar period, this time potentially activated by the Soviet Union, would not occur. Finally, the post-1945 settlement was also different from the post-1919 settlement in that the victors took much more care in constructing an international economic settlement that supported their broader political goals. The groundwork for this was built at the Bretton Woods negotiations in 1944, that eventually yielded international organi-, such international organizations as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank,. And the GATT or the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade which was the precursor to what now exists as the World Trade Organization. So Bretton Woods. Three key economic institutions: International Monetary Fund, World Bank, and the World Trade Organization. All of these institutions were designed to support the liberalization of trade barriers that would gradually increase. International commerce. And again, the inter-war period had a profound effect on these attempts to create this new economic order. The leaders at the time wanted to prevent Ag, a new great depression because they believed that the whole security system could come undone in the face of another economic crisis. In the same way that economic collapse in the 1930s. Had helped to foster fascism and isolationism. 