 Now we'll talk about The Cold War as a great power conflict. And so we'll try to use this framework that Pat and I've established about great power wars and their post-war settlements that tend to have great influence on the structure of international relations. By looking at the end of The Cold War. As something akin to a great power settlement that has structured the current arrangement or structure of international relations that we have today. I will argue that the current state of affairs between the United States and Russia is rooted in the post cold war settlement. and that the current Russian aggression in Ukraine can be explained, in large part, by deep satisfaction on the part of Russia with that settlement. Now let me first make one thing very clear, so you don't think that I've gone. Crazy here. I'm nor claiming that the Cold War was a great power war. The label Cold War is very mean, meaningful here. Unlike Hot wars of World War I and World War II, which witnesses direct military conflict between the largest and most powerful militaries of the world at the time. The Cold War did not experience any significant direct military conflict between the two super powers, the United States and the Soviet Union. They dominated the system for more than 40 years in the middle and the late 20th century. Did not get into direct conflict with one another. Now sure there were important proxy wars in Korea. Vietnam and Afghanistan as well as numerous other military conflicts around the world that involve the two super Po, super powers, but these wars were nothing like the great power conflicts of World War I and World War II, that engulfed the whole world. Of course we should be thankful, there was not a World War III between the United States and the Soviet Union and their allies. Because it would most likely have involved nuclear weapons, and we could have destroyed all of human civilization as we knew it. So, the Cold War wasn't Ag, a great power war, however what I am arguing is that the Cold War, although never a great power war. Was definitely a great power conflict, that ended with one great power, the Soviet Union, being defeated. And another great power, the United States, winning. And benefiting greatly from the new order that was established in the aftermath. Of that conflict. Besides having a winner and a loser, the end of the Cold War resembled the end of the other great power conflicts in that it resulted in major changes to the international system. The same type of changes that occurred after World War I and World War II. And I will highlight the four major changes to the international system at the end of the Cold War that make it similar to the end of the other world wars, in the beginning and middle of the 20th century. First, there was territorial and state change. The map radically changed after the end of the Cold War. States and empires like the Soviet Union, but also, the former Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia disintegrated, and new states emerged in their wake. Secondly, there was regime change. Just like at the end of the other world wars, political regimes changed. Communist systems across the region collapsed and were replaced, sometimes with democracies, as in much of Eastern Europe. But at other times with non-communist systems that were authoritarian. Third, the distribution of military power changed dramatically. There was a huge shift in this distribution of power in the system as one pole in the bipolar system, and by bipolar they just mean two main actors. Right? Of the Cold War. So the Cold War was a superpower conflict between two huge actors, the United States and the Soviet Union. The end of the Cold War had a huge shift in this distribution of power, because one of these two main actors imploded leaving only one super power that deserved the name in a news -- unipolar world dominated more than ever before, especially in the 1990s by the United States. So this shift in distribution of military power was a key effect of the end of the cold war. Fourth, there was a change enforcement mechanisms for the new status quo. The new enforcement mechanisms in the form of international institutions emerged. In particular, the Warsaw Pact, which was the alliance system run by the Soviet Union for East European satellite countries like Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, etc. That alliance system collapsed and NATO, which was already in existence, so that wasn't a new organization. However, it expanded to take in many, but not all of the former adversaries, well, from the Warsaw Pact. Right? The key one that was left out were various elements of the former Soviet Union, most importantly Russia. Right? The European Union, an economic organization, also played an important role in integrating Eastern Europe and these new states or newly independent, more independent state into Europe. So the end of the Cold War brought about these huge changes that were on the scale of the end of a great power war. The other rea, reality that must be acknowledged is that there were winners and losers in this new system and that had a great affect particularly on controversies today. The first thing to note is that the Soviet collapse was about the collapse at the end of the Cold War was that it was viewed as a great loss for Russia, the largest successor state to the Soviet Union. Now this might seem obvious, right? But remember, like the other 14 countries that emerge out of the Soviet Union, 15 in all, Russian plus 14 others. Russia also gained it's independence from Soviet rule and a significant portion of Russian citizens and the rulers, most notedly, Boris Yeltsin, the first president of Russia, played a huge part in bringing down the Soviet system, through mass protests and political entry. So what did Russia lose exactly with the end of the Cold War and the disintegration of the Soviet Union? Again, let me give you a list. I've got three here. First, territory. There was a loss of territory, particularly in the minds of average Russians. Russia was viewed as the heart and central core of the Soviet Union, even though the Soviet Union was truly a multi-national empire that contained numerous nations. And nearly half of the population of the Soviet Union was non-Russian. So the collapse of the Soviet Union produced a very different experience for Russia, the largest successor state, compared to all the other new states that emerged out of the Soviet Union. For the other 14, newly independent, non-Russian states, places like Ukraine, Moldova, Armenia, Georgia, et cetera., the collapse of the Soviet Union offered the benefit of independence after literally centuries of these places being under the rule of first the Soviet Union in the last 70 years and prior to that, the Russian empire. But for Russia, it was viewed as a loss, a literal reduction of territory. Places like Kazakhstan or Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, as well as Ukraine and Belarus have not, have not only been part of the Soviet Union for more than 70 years, but were also part of the Russian Empire for centuries. So many Russians viewed these new countries as historically part of Russia. Russians even coined the term near abroad to sort of capture this irony and many of them felt about needing a passport or a visa to visit places like Ukraine or Moldova that they always felt were just, not just part of the Soviet Union, but part of Russia. So, as a counter factual analogy, imagine that it was the United States that lost the Cold War and disintegrated. And large states like Texas or Florida or California became independent countries, leaving a truncated United States in its wake. That is what many Russians felt had happened to Russia. So, in addition to this crucial loss of territory, Russia also lost other things. First, or I mean secondly, there was empire. As we noted in the lecture on the end of the Cold War, the collapse of the Soviet Union also meant the loss of an empire in Eastern Europe. This had critical, strategic and psychological effects for Russia and its status in the international system. The fact that those countries that had been in the Soviet Union's sphere of influence gravitated to this American-led Western organization, NATO further aggravated this loss. The fact that NATO was expanding, but did not invite and welcome in Russia as a member, made it even worse. The conflict over Ukraine should be seen as partially motivated by this legacy of the end of the Cold War. And finally, their super power status and influence. Russia loss its super power status with the collapse of the Soviet Union. Despite the fact that it still possessed enough nuclear weapons to destroy the planet several times over. Russia lost its international influence in the aftermath of the end of the Cold War. It has since rebounded a bit, mostly as a major supplier of energy, but it still faces huge constraints. This could be one of the biggest psychological losses for Russian citizens. If you look at surveys they suggest that a majority of Russians think that the collapse of the Soviet Union was a historical tragedy and what they miss about most about the Soviet Union is living in the country that is one of two super powers in the world. Not, they don't miss communism and, and, some, well, some do, but not many. Putin's foreign policy and the challenges that he and Russia make to the West should be seen in part as his attempt to sort of regain this superpower status. Okay. So let's move onto-. >> Actually, let's we have, we got time to take some questions. >> Okay. >> Let me go back to the question board here. So, one question is settlements such as treaties or anything. After a war, do they help to shape the great power relationships that are in action today. And so, I read this question as how does what happened in 1945 influence what's going on today? So let me give you an example. The NATO, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization is setup in the aftermath of World War II to, for the United States to mobilize support among Western Europe to contain Soviet expansion and to counter the Soviet threat. This treaty, this organization that has bound together these Western states still drives how they respond to security threats today. So we have the growth of NATO in the 1990s that really activates Russian resistance that exists today in Ukraine. We see a heavy NATO presence in the war against Afghanistan. And so, it's still shaping this organiza, this alliance organization that was setup. In 19. What is it? In 1949,1951. I can't remember is. It still shapes how state's great powers interact today. And you can think about the current tension between the United States and Russia as reflecting this. Another question is, is this story about great power politics, about how they, about how great power structured international politics, just a story about, to the victor go to the spoils? Yes and no. On the one hand, these moments at the end of, of these huge wars create opportunities for great powers to write the rules of the road. In a way that benefits their interests. So, these are dis, these are disproportionate historical mo, moments when these leaders have a lot of control over the future political wo, order that exists. At the same time, not every great power uses these opportunities. To take things and possess and to create an empire. And so think about Germany and Japan in the aftermath of 1945 as an example of this. The United States acted uniquely here. In a sense that it occupied both countries. To alter the composition of the domestic political game in these two states. To root out extreme nationalist imperialistic interests. It protected both countries through alliance relationships, and then it granted significant amounts of autonomy to the respective governments. To make their choices. Marshall plan aid is a similar thing. The United States basically says, you, we need to rebuild Western Europe. Here's a bunch of money. You guys get together, decide how you wanna spend it. And we're not gonna interfere, in terms of how this is spent. And so it's, it's hard for me to square these examples with the story about the United States being rapacious. And using its position of military influence. To take these states as that, as -- >> Rapacious being -- being predatory. >> Yeah, yeah. Another question is based on the, the definition of -- >> It's a big word so I'm just saying. >> Sorry, sorry. Based on the definition of stability of a political system being the lack of war. Does this extend between states and non-states and I would-. >> That's a big question. >> And I would say no, and I would think about, when we're talking about stability of the larger great power order, I'm thinking here about the absence of great power conflict. And so, any time you see a war, it reflects some underlying disagreement, a dissatisfaction with the political status quo. And so you can think about, say, a war between Ecuador and Peru in 1995. But that doesn't destabilize the larger international system. Because the United States isn't a major player in this. Russia isn't. And, and China isn't. So we can have these small wars that leave most of the rest of the structure intact in the international system. So borders don't change in Europe as a function of a war in Latin America in 1995. It's these huge wars, these great power wars, in these small, narrow historical windows that remake the system, because everybody's involved, and it reflects a deeper dissatisfaction with the rules of the road at that time-. >> This is something that we'll be talking about more when we look at the War on Terror, too, is, is what is the, the magnitude of this sort of conflict? I mean and, and there's differences of opinion. Of course, politicians and the media. Emphasize the, the, you know magnitude of this threat, >> Mm-hm >> Because they need to do that for various reasons. But scholars are, are quite divided about how serious these threats really are to national interests and national security for the United States, so we'll be getting into. This as well. But there's a huge difference between a war between the United States and Russia and a war between United States and ISIS. Or -- >> Yeah. >> Or something like that. >> Another way to think about this question is so yes, we have a series of terrorists groups that are revolting against the United States and the American-led order. But it's not changing the composition of all the states in the system. We have this conflict between Iraq and Syria that's altering those. It's not changing NATO, it's not changing the basic economic infrastructure that's oriented around American Finance, the IMF, Brenton Woods, a lot of the larger international order still exists and isn't threatened by this this attack. >> Okay so let's move on. So we we're just ended before the break. About the losses for Russia in the end of the Cold War and its aftermath and so just as Russia lost the Cold War and suffered significant setbacks domestically and internationally as a state. The US and the West won the Cold War in the sense that it enjoyed substantial gains in their security and military power, as well as economic prosperity and ideological hegemony. One can see Western gains and Russian losses as different sides of the same coin. So what did the U.S. and the West gain after the end of the Cold War? First, there's military hegemony over Eastern Europe. The expansion of western military hegemony as the main security alliance, NATO, expanded to include most of. The former Communist countries that had been under the, under Soviet hegemony during the, World War was a huge shift in the balance of power and the those who sort of ran the show when it came to all of the European continent. And so this expansion NATO was a, not just a hu, a watershed historical event in that loss for Russia, but also a huge benefit for the United States and the West. It, It made security of Western Europe and, and the United States greater. There's also economic hegemony. Along with military hegemony, there was this expansion of western economic strength and influence, as countries in Eastern Europe adopted free market reforms, and entered the European Union. And became part of the European economic space or zone. So, you have this confluence of economic and military hegemony. These are the two hallmarks of, a international order. Thirdly, the collapse of communism had huge ideological benefits for the United States in the West. Many countries emerging out of their failed communist regimes. Including at first! You got to emphasis the at first part of this. Russia itself, Russia coming out of the collapse of the Soviet Union embraced the rhetoric of democracy and adopted democratic reforms. This emulation. Of, the, of democracy and political systems and economic systems that have long been in existence in the West, gave great credence to the western brand, if you will, and provided significant soft power to the United States. And finally, the collapse of the Soviet Union resulted in the United States becoming the one. Unrivaled superpower in the world. And the reason I say that, is that, no country had the whole package. This combination of military strength that outweighed all other competitors. Economic strength. Political stability and strength. All of those, together. Plus a certain cultural. Hegemony that the United States possessed. And so, in many ways Russian losses contributed directly to American and Western gains. Yet despite these gains, the United States still faced these foreign policy dilemmas after the Cold War. Just as it faced immense challenges after it was a main. Party to the victory in World War II. The biggest challenge was what to do about a new, weakened post-communist Russia. >> During the 1990s, Russia faced such severe economic and political problems that there was a real chance that it too, would break apart just like the Soviet Union did or decline, as many had predicted at the time in the early 90s into social and economic cha, chaos. Ironically, a weak Russia posed a number of significant threats. So you fight this Cold War for decades, hoping to wear down a Soviet Union. And then when it does finally implode, the biggest problem you face is that the, the main successor state is too weak. Right? There were fears that the country would lose control over its huge stockpile of nuclear weapons, economic and political collapse could mean a mass migration that would strain Europe. Elections in Russia during the sever economic downturn in the 90s and, and, and later, threatened to produce a nationalist leader that would threaten it's neighbors and arguably that, it's kind of what we're, we're getting now. And in response to these threats, what did the Clinton administration do that the President that was in power during this crucial period of the 90s. He followed a dual strategy. On the one hand, President Bill Clinton sought to help Russia adopt democracy and capitalism through foreign aid and advice in the hopes that Russia could be transformed into this free market democracy that was pro-Western in it's foreign policy. And could ultimately just be integrated into the new Western security and economic order in Europe. Yet at the same time, Clinton also oversaw a dramatic expansion of NATO that seized the opportunity of a weakened Russia and provided this nuclear. I mean, this militarized to these new states or these states that had been part of the Warsaw Pact, Poland, Hungary, Czech Republic entered the military alliance. And, but also, even former Soviet Republics, parts of the Soviet Union, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania joined NATO. This was all done over the in very, very strong objections of Russia. Which saw NATO expansive, expansion as a third, security threat against itself. Many observers, both here in the United States and in Russia objected to this move of NATO expansion. Arguing that it would alienate Russia from the West. We're gonna talk a bit more about this in a later lecture, as well. The Russia faced its own challenges in responding to the no, new Post-Cold War order. The key question it faced was the prospect of joining the West as a member of the Western Political Community. This decision of which way to go was fraught with challenges, given the history between Russia and Western powers. Russia was a country that historically saw itself as part of Western culture, but often found itself on the outside of the core Western community of states. Moreover, Russia wanted the economic prosperity that came with admission to the Western economy, but it did not welcome the prospect of being a junior partner to the United States. As it perceived that many European states were becoming as they joined these organizations. Ultimately, the prospect of preserving the new Post-Cold War order based on an expanded Western alliance by incorporating Russia into the fold was abandoned as the democratic experiment in Russia ended and a new more centralized state directed form of market economy, dubbed state capitalism, emerged and this new leader, Vladimir Putin, emerged with a decidedly anti-Western approach to foreign policy. And so today we live with a, a political and security and economic international order in Europe that remains largely dominated by the United States and the EU, but it faces a Russian state, that has begun to use force to challenge that order in places like Ukraine. 