 Now, I wanna continue this discussion of postwar settlements, but shift to another related issue. Whether the era of great power war may be over and consequently, how long will the, the current American led international order might last? It shifts conceptual gears a bit. Questioning whether great power war will still play a central role in international politics. For the simple reasons, the great powers might have solved this problem. There are some people that think that great powers will never fight another large scale war and you, you get this in the debate in your readings today. The manner in which the Cold War ended, namely with the peaceful implosion of the Soviet Union has helped to prompt this larger debate, because it was so unexpected. You shouldn't take this conversation though, to indicate that all war is increasingly unlikely. As you can see, in contemp, in the contemporary Middle East and Africa, there are still lots of ongoing conflicts. Instead, this debate implies that these wars are increasingly civil wars or concentrated more narrowly in specific regions of the world. Great powers might intervene in these wars, but they are not likely to confront each other directly. So, in this section, we want to examine some of the potential explanations for why great powers might not fight an extended conflict again. Now this question has a deeper implication for the endurance of the contemporary international order that is lead by the United States. Remember, we just talked about how important big, great power wars are for changing the structure of international politics. So, if great power war is now a thing of the past. If great powers don't fight each other, then we may not see any new challengers to the United States for a very long time. Consequently, this system we have now, one that sees deep economic integration among countries, an active role by international organizations in meeting new challenges of the contemporary world, more democracies around the world and an expanded American military and political presence all over the world. This broader order might endure for a long time. So now, I wanna give you three potential sources of this great power piece. The first focuses on globalization and how international trade helps to decrease the importance of holding territory in contemporary politics. The argument goes something like this: Hundreds of years ago before the industrial revolution, National Wealth was associated with the physical possession of natural resources like land and gold. The transformative processes associated with the industrial revolution, like urbanization and large-scale production in factories, helped to change these foundations of wealth. Today, states can get rich through something called comparative advantage in which their economies specialize in the production of a few goods for which the costs of production are relatively low in that country. That country can then trade those goods more cheap that are produced more cheaply at home for goods that are produced more expensively abroad -- I should say, for goods that are, that are produced more cheaply abroad, but expensive at home and so you, you realize these gains from trade. Now these developments have dramatically reduced the need to hold more territory to capture some of the economic value of the resources that are attached to territory. In simple terms, there is no economic reason for the United States to invade Canada or Mexico. The United States does not need physical possession of these territories to get rich. Instead, the United States has a robust trading relationship with both countries. And this economic exchange makes all three countries wealthier in the aggregate. The same principle works for American relations with China today. Why go to war with China when there are such strong economic incentives to remain at peace? China has played a huge role in funding American budget deficits over the last 20 years. This supply of credit has also pushed down interest rates in the United States, and made it easier for Americans to buy homes. At the same time, massive American imports of Chinese manufactured products are creating literally millions of jobs in China, and helping to ease their internal political tension associated with moving millions of people from the farms to the cities in the last 30 years in China. In sum, globalization provides a powerful economic incentive for great powers like the United States and China to avoid military confrontation when political tensions escalate. A war would simply halt these mutual benefits. The second big explanation for great power peace highlights nuclear deterrence. And here, the story focuses on the risks and costs associated with confronting another state that possesses something called secure second strike capabilities. And before spelling out this logic, let me first define what I mean by secure second strike capabilities. This means that a state can absorb a nuclear strike and still have enough nuclear weapons in its arsenal to launch a retaliatory strike, and inflict unacceptable costs, for example, destroying multiple cities, on its adversary. In this situation, an adversary cannot destroy the entire nuclear arsenal of another country in a surprise first strike. So, why does this mutual possession of secure second strike capabilities foster peace among great powers? It essentially freezes the territorial status quo among them and raises the risks that an intense political conflict between them could escalate, and impose unacceptable costs through a nuclear holocaust. Great powers cannot invade each other without risking getting attacked with nuclear weapons. This possibility or threat then helps to push both sides to some form of peaceful resolution by eliminating any incentive to move armies into the territory of another great power. Experience of the Cold War, in which to United States and the Soviet Union managed to avoid nuclear war shows how these conditions create powerful incentives to settle political disputes before using military force. Now the third explanation for great power peace focuses on something called unipolarity, which is used to describe the structural condition associated with American economic, political and military dominance in the world. When you hear the term polarity, this refers to simply counting the number of great powers in the world. And so when we have a unipolar system, the implication is that there's one dominant state, or one hegemony. In this case, the United States. So this huge advantage over competitors eliminates the incentives to challenge the United States because it would be so costly to do so. And I should say, challenge the United States in a direct military confrontation because it would be so costly to do so. Think here back to the discussion on primacy that we had earlier in the semester. The United States is protected by oceans that would make it very difficult to invade. It possesses a huge nuclear arsenal that would probably be deployed if the United States was invaded. It possesses the strongest and most effective military in the world. And, the United States has the richest economy in the world. Consequently, if a country tried to challenge the United States, say through an arms race, to alter the distribution of military power in the world, the United States could easily adjust and win in that arms race by tapping into the vast wealth of its society. Now this vast inequality in economic and military resources between the United States and the rest of the world helps to freeze the political status quo among great powers. At the same time, other great powers are deterred from fighting each other because the United States might intervene and influence the course of the conflict. 