 So the first thing I want to do is point out a few things about the reading and that the first thing you should be doing when you read these articles is to identify or think about the overarching question or argument that guides the analysis. So in this paper Stent is trying to build a policy argument about how the United States should respond to Russia's increasing foreign policy aggression in both Ukraine and in Syria. The policy position argues that the US should try to cooperate with Russia in areas where there are common interests while recognizing that these opportunities are very limited. In short, I would characterize this as a pragmatic argument that is skeptical as to whether or not Russia and the United States will be able to break out of a conflictual political relationship in the near future. So if you answered agree to the Snap poll question I would encourage you to go back over the reading, paying particular attention to the introduction and the conclusion. Note that in the intro she casts Putin as being highly critical of the use of American power on the world. She quotes him by saying one state and of course first and foremost the United States has overstepped its national borders in every way. So she emphasizes Russia is revisionist with respect to the international status quo and it's been very transparent about this desire to remake the status quo and remember, the United States has played an important role in establishing the broader international status quo since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991. So let's talk about a couple more important things to point out from the article. First as we were just talking about, she characterizes Putin as challenging the international order, or status quo, that was created in the aftermath of the collapse of the Soviet Union. You're going to see some direct parallels here between the Stent reading and the McFaul interview. To that end, Russia is trying to increase its influence in the Middle East and shoring up the Assad regime in Syria could help to achieve that. Second, despite the potential for common interests between the United States and Russia in countering ISIS and radical Islamic terrorism, it has been hard for the United States and Russia to cooperate in Syria. Russia sees Assad as an important counter to ISIS. The United States sees Assad as part of the problem. They have opposing views on the role of Assad here. For the United States, his authoritarian regime, Assad's authoritarian regime created deep popular dissatisfaction which then contributed to regime collapse, civil war and a political opportunity; political vacuum for ISIS in eastern Syria. These conflicting interests can be seen in Russia's targeting of opposition groups in Syria that the United States supports. As Stent notes, Russia and the United States are engaged in a proxy conflict in Syria. Third, she suggests that Russian and American political cooperation is likely to be limited, restricted to military matters such as counter proliferation policies relative to Iran and North Korea and the management of resource issues in the Arctic. She also finishes with a critique of the Obama -- a subtle critique of the Obama administration, saying that the next American president should not attempt another reset, and you're going to get a chance to hear more about this rest in the McFaul interview shortly. Okay, so let's look at some of reactions to the readings. You want to grab some of these? >> Sure. Well first there's the snap poll results which I found a little bit surprising. We had 40.6 percent, about 41 percent that agreed with that statement that she was optimistic whereas 28 and a half percent disagreed, and then 31 percent don't know. So we're going to say that- I assume they don't know didn't do the reading and that's why they don't know. The 40 percent agreed, in looking through the reading comments, I think there's a couple of things to note about that. One is that there might just be some misunderstanding, but there's also this interpretation about what optimistic means and that's an important thing to perhaps take a second to talk about. One of the comments was I agree with the fact that I think Stent is optimistic but there's a limited opportunity for cooperation. So if you interpreted her argument as being optimistic because there is some room for cooperation, then I would say that that's not the central takeaway from this reading, but there's a certain element to a limited amount of cooperation. The central argument was the rather difficult relationship between Russia and the United States. >> Yeah and remember there are fundamental conflicts of interest between the United States and Russia that aren't going away, and this is going to come up in the McFaul reading again. We have Russia's view of the world that's created in the aftermath of 1991 is a view about American power and dominance and influence and America moving around the world to influence domestic politics in countries outside of its normal sphere of influence and inside Russia's sphere of influence. And Putin obviously disagrees with that and is, what he's trying to do is in a sense roll back that 1991 order, increasing Russian influence in the Middle East and around the world, in Russia's near abroad, in Ukraine, in Syria. And so intervention there is designed to increase Russia's influence and is in direct contradiction with the United States. So the point here is that there are real fundamental conflicts of interest between the two great powers. >> Let me interject just a second. One other thing to note about this is just the dynamic here and the crises that we're talking about around Ukraine and Syria. And these wars vary, high drama crises. When Russia went in and annexed Crimea, part of Ukraine, it really sparked an international flurry of threat, counter-threat, and some real hammering of how far that conflict in Ukraine could have expanded to include the United States, Western Europe, NATO, and the like, and so the interventions by Vladamir Putin in Ukraine and in Syria really has disrupted a lot of the efforts by the United States to manage affairs in these regions and really threaten to change the status quo of how the world works. You just don't invade sovereign nations for example. I mean, that's sort of against the informal and even formal rules of the international order. And so the idea that somehow the United States could cooperate on management of resources, and the Arctic pales in comparison to the detriment that the conflict between the United States and Russia over Ukraine, over Syria, and who knows where else might take place can hamper international security and international peace. So be mindful of relative importance here. I mean, even though the United States and Russia could find common interests in certain realms, they're far overshadowed by the conflicts that they find themselves getting into. 