 >> So let's move on to the interview. So this interview today is with former US ambassador to Russia, Michael McFaul, and Michael McFaul as I've already noted is one of the world's most experienced and insightful observers in contemporary Russian politics and in particular, President Vladimir Putin. He has had more personal contact arguably with President Putin than virtually any other Western scholar or official both in his capacity as US ambassador to Russia, but also as a scholar, who years earlier spent a lot of time in Russia studying the collapse of Communism in the Soviet Union, and Russia's transformation, or attempted transformation away from communism to something else. He was the architect and a Chief Adviser during the Obama administration of US policy toward Russia including the reset and he'll be talking a bit about that in the interview. And he is still now a noted commentator on news programs, on television, and in academia on all these issues related to Russia and in US foreign policy in general. So let's go ahead and run the Skype interview with ambassador McFaul now. Welcome. We are doing a special interview for class today and we will be talking with Michael McFaul, and Michael McFaul is a professor of political science at Stanford University. He's the director and senior fellow at the Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies, and the Peter and Helen Bing senior fellow at the Hoover institution. He's also an analyst for NBC news and for five years he's served in the Obama administration first as the special assistant to the President and Senior Director for Russian and Eurasian Affairs in the National Security Council at the White House, and then as the US Ambassador to the Russian Federation in 2012 to 2014. He is the author or editor of by my count 12 books -- He's been quite busy -- and dozens of articles and his op-eds have appeared in The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, the Washington Post, Politico, TIME, the Weekly Standard. And so we are very happy to have Mike here today to talk to us about Russian and US relations and the state of things. So let's just get right to it. Welcome, Mike. And so as I always want to, I'm going to start with the Cold War, my favorite -- >> Rob likes to talk about the Cold War. >> I do like to talk about the Cold War. And so what I want to ask you and what I want to start with is a little background to see how we got to where we are with the relations between the United States and Russia, and at the end of the Cold War when Communism collapsed and the Soviet Union collapsed there were a lot of high hopes on both sides, in the Russian and American side among at least certain circles that with the collapse of Communism there was an opportunity for a new and more cooperative relationship between the US and post-communist Russia. So my question is why did things turn out so differently? I mean we aren't cooperative friends now. What went wrong in your opinion? >> So that's a big hard question. >> Well, we like to start with a softball. >> I'm actually writing about it right now so it's on my mind. But let's back up a little bit about to just remind everybody that there are many theories about how you might tackle that problem, right? I most certainly was in the camp back in 1991, the year the Soviet Union collapsed, that thought Russia could develop markets, could develop democratic institutions, and integrate into the West. I was living in the Soviet Union actually that year so I witnessed all that turmoil and the protest against the Soviet system. And I believed all that because I thought that the fundamental problem in the Cold War was not Russia's power and was not Russia's culture, but was Russia's, was the Soviet system and the Soviet ideology. So you take the ideology away, they should be able to become democratic and market supporting and European just like all other countries. So that's one theory. The two other theories that I've alluded to, and I'll elaborate on that theory in a minute, but I want to make clear that there are these other arguments that said one is about power and that the Cold War ended because Russia and the Soviet Union before it became very weak, but now Russia's stronger today and therefore what you see now is kind of classic great power politics or at least regional great power politics and no one should be surprised by that. And then there's a second argument which some of my friends both in academia but also in policy making circles had back in 1991 which is to say that Russia is an imperial place. They have kind of an attitude towards their neighbors that comes from hundreds of years of imperialism and so eventually they're going to back to being confrontational with the West and threatening to their neighbors because of that history. So those are the three different -- I mean there are probably more but those are the three big paradigms that I wrestle with. And the reason I believe the third one is wrong is because we had periods in time in US-Russian relations that were not confrontational, that were not about checking imperial aggression and that was a lot of the 90's and those same Russians with the same genetic code and the same historical baggage behave very differently. So I don't think that one's true. The power one is a little bit more complicated and here's the way I would put it. It's part of the story, but not the whole story. Nobody's worried about Moldova invading Europe, right, just to take kind of an extreme case because you don't need to know whether Moldova is run by democrats or nationalists or fascists or communist. You don't need to know any of that if you know how much power projection capability they have. That tells you what kind of relationship they're going to have vis a vis confrontational relations. They don't have the capacity. So the military capacity peace is a necessary condition of the confrontational period we're in today, and Russia has more economic and military power today than they did 25 or 30 years ago and that's part of the confrontation. But I don't think it's the whole story because there were earlier periods that I can remember where we had a more cooperative relationship. And the one I know the best of course is when I was in the government. And when I joined in 2009 we had a policy called the [inaudible], [speaking in Russian] where we decided that we had some interests that we shared with Russia and in the President's first meeting with President Medvedev in April of 2009, he kind of laid out this argument and Medvedev agreed with him on a lot of it, and as a result of that the idea of being we have common threats, common interests, and therefore through engagement we can achieve what President Obama liked to say were win-win outcomes. Right, it's not zero-sum. It's good for Russia, it's good for the United States. And because Medvedev was in power and because he believed in this same analytical framework, we got a lot of big cooperative things done. We got the START treaty done, we got sanctions on Iran, northern distribution network, WTO, and by the way back then, two-thirds of the Russian population had a positive view of the United States as did two-thirds of the American population. So all of that happens, you know, just a few years ago and therefore confrontation because of power or history in my view was not inevitable. To get to the punchline about why it's now, I think two-- it's a complicated story but I don't know how long you want to go on so cut me off whenever you want, but I think two factors are really important. One is Putin decided to come back as president in the fall of 2011, and I'll tell you honestly at the time I was still working at the White house, I didn't, you know, I lamented the fact -- the President asked me, you know, what does this mean in terms of US-Russia relations. And I said, you know, you know Medvedev better, but Putin's been the big decision maker so there shouldn't be any fundamental change because it's not like he was retired and now he's coming back -- he was prime minister, he was part of this process. That turned out to be incorrect. I was wrong about that. And what I learned over time in dealing with Putin is that he did have a different world view than Medvedev and to over simply it, it's a complex one, but to oversimplify he saw things in zero sum terms with respect to the United States, and he worried about us using our overt and covert power to overthrow regimes that we didn't like. And he made that very clear to the President in one of their first meetings. And by the way just to state for the record there's a lot of empirical data to support Putin's hypothesis about American power, right We have used the CIA to overthrow regimes, we have used our military to overthrow regimes. So that he would have that suspicion about Obama that's a reasonable argument, right, and the President said 'I'm different' and we argued about that. But then the second thing that happened that is I think vital to this story is there were massive demonstrations in Russia soon after he made that announcement and he thought that we inspired them. he thought that we supported them. He thought that I personally supported them when I was the US ambassador, and therefore he reacted against that and one of his reactions is part of his argument for shoring up his power was to describe us as a threat and as an enemy of Russia, and that I think then put us into a negative spiral for about two years that then was punctuated with another massive demonstration in Ukraine in the fall of 2013 and then winter of 2014 which again Putin blamed on us and then when the government fell there he just decided, you know, these are the Americans taking advantage of me again, and that's when he went into Crimea and that's when we've entered this new period of confrontation. >> So can I follow up? What I hear there is that what's important to understand Russia is domestic politics in Russia and the rise of Putin. So what does that leave for options right now for the United States in terms of what should American foreign policy look like relative to Russia if the pivot or the key is domestic politics inside Russia. What kind of levers of influence might the US have? >> So the first important point is to have, to understand that what I've said is true, and when I was in the government, I'm just saying that because when I was in the government the argument I just laid out for you just now was not supported initially when Putin came to power because people thought maybe we can work with him, that Putin, Russia has national interests that are the same irrespective of who the leaders are, and that was a big, you know, it's a debate that you guys would know from IR theory. Well, it was a debate that I experienced in real time within the US government. Today my sense of the Obama administration, I mean, I know a lot of people there well, in fact some of them are in the photos right behind us, is that now if that was a debate intellectually, inside the government, the debate's over and people now understand that we're in a fundamentally new period and I think the three elements of their strategy are correct, although I would give them different grades on implementation. So their three pieces of their strategy are one, punish Putin for bad behavior, that is, for annexation of Crimea and supporting these rebels in Eastern Ukraine through sanctions. If you're going to break the rules of the game there have to be costs associated to that. Two, strengthen NATO and make sure that Putin understands that our Article 5 commitments to defend our allies are true for all of our allies, you know, France, Germany, and Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. And then three, to help rebuild Ukraine. Those are the three elements of their policy, and I think they're the right policy. I would add a fourth one which is to continue to engage Russian society. Don't cut off the entire country because, you know, someday there'll be a reversal of this in my opinion, and don't make it a Russia versus the United States, make it a West versus Putin's policies. That's hard to do in reality, but I think that's an important analytic difference. In terms of the three things that they're doing, I've been impressed by the sanctions. These are the most comprehensive sanctions that the United States has put in place against Russia ever in our 200 year history of bilateral relations. Do you know how many people were on the sanctions list when Russia invaded Georgia in 2008? Let's guess. >> Not a lot. >> Zero. >> There you go, that's not much. >> And same with Russian companies. So this marks up a profoundly coercive response to that same behavior. My worry there -- I just spent a week in Europe -- my worry there is that the EU and American unity about sanctions is beginning to fray, but I think that's been good. Second, the NATO peace I think has been good, too. I support the President's increasing of the budget. I think it's 3.4 billion as opposed to 700 million last year for the defense of Europe. I think that's the right thing to do and I think they're making good progress on that. The third piece about supporting Ukraine is probably the most underdeveloped part of the policy, but there again, you know, I would just say it has a lot to do with the Ukrainians as much as what's happening in Washington or Brussels. >> Well let's talk a little bit about Vladimir Putin. You know, he seems to be the centerpiece of trying to understand what Russia, especially in foreign policy is trying to do and a lot of our students and a lot of people like me are a bit perplexed by some of his moves and so I'd love to hear your thoughts about his grand strategy, his world view. Why does he seem to take such a risk-acceptant, kind of an aggressive foreign policy when there's a lot of reasons why you'd think in a country with such a struggling economy they wouldn't be able to sustain this kind of thing. And so could you just give us a sense of -- especially in your specific experiences as US ambassador, you know, what's the deal with Putin and what's the deal with Russia? Do they really hate the United States and try to do everything they can to oppose it? Is that their strategy, or what? >> So it's a very hard question and I don't want to pretend that I know all the answers, although I probably spent more time with Putin that most Americans and I've followed his career. I first met him actually in the spring of 1991 so I've known him for a long time. I'm sure he doesn't call me his friend and I'd just call him my colleague, my counterpart. So here's my best stab at your very important question. So as I was alluding to before, Putin sees the world in zero sum terms. He sees the United States fundamentally as a competitor to Russia's national interests and that comes from his training. You know, when he was the age of your students he was training to be in the KGB and so their courses just like yours, you know, you can imagine what they taught about what the role of the United States plays and he's had that updated. He's a very sophisticated guy, by the way. He's not a simplistic guy. And he can compartmentalize, he can be confrontational on one policy, cooperative in another, but fundamentally that worldview that I think he developed as a young student has not changed and therefore that's the first piece. The second piece is he was in East Germany during the times when demonstrations brought down those regimes. And he saw what happened, when people mobilized on the streets and he saw what happened in his own country when people mobilized and helped to bring down the Soviet Union, something that he did not want and he once said that was one of the greatest tragedies of the 20th century. So he's paranoid about people. And then third, he has a theory of American power that grossly exaggerates our ability to manipulate individuals overseas. You know, he thinks the CIA can do all kinds of things. By the way, the CIA can do all kinds of things, don't get me wrong. I'm quite impressed with their capabilities, especially now, better than the government. But they can't do near as many things that Putin thinks. So when the Arab Spring happened for instance, you know, for him, that was the CIA not the people in Tunisia and Syria and Egypt. When the demonstrations happened in his country he saw behind that the hidden hand of the United States and that's his world view. Then to add to that for, you know, a theory that we've been encroaching on his power, pushing back on him, trying to overthrow him and then trying to overthrow his ally in Ukraine, and that to me is, you know, his response, grabbing Crimea and going into Eastern Ukraine was a very specific response in that analytic framework I just described to a crisis. It wasn't some part grand strategy. You know, he has not in my view been dreaming about bringing Crimea and Novorossiya into Russia for the last 20 years. It was very emotional tactical response in that moment because he feared he was losing control of a country right on his border. And it worked. It was successful. It was cheap. Crimea especially. And his popularity ratings in part because of his propaganda skyrocketed, they went through the roof. You know, he went from kind of stuck at 50 to 80 and that then made him more bold to go into Eastern Ukraine. Now that's kind of stalled out in my view. I think he's failed in Eastern Ukraine and he realizes it, but that's the initial explanation. And with Syria I'd say more or less the same thing with a couple of caveats. One is, you know, from our very early conversations with him, he had this argument with us about how do you bring about modernization in the Arab world. Our argument to him was the place is blowing apart, we need to push this in an evolutionary peaceful way, and his argument was you need to stand behind modernizing autocrats. This is back in 2011, and that's been his view all the way with Mr. Assad. That policy was not working for four years. He was losing territory, he was losing to the radicals, and so I think he intervened first and foremost just to save his guy in Syria and, you know, in the short term not unlike Crimea it's been successful so that leads to more bolder operations which we're seeing today. >> Can I ask how sustainable do you think Russian policy is in bolstering Assad right now? Are there any risks in the long run that you see something like Afghanistan in the 1980's? Is he concerned about this and what are the long term consequences of this bolstering of the regime there? >> So I don't know, the long term consequences are always hard to predict. So I want to just underscore on just guessing. But I'd say a couple of things. One is he's very concerned. It's not like they're not concerned about that. They're precisely focused on that and therefore unlike Afghanistan I think it's unlikely that they're going to try to reestablish sovereignty over the whole country of Syria. I think that's the biggest misconception in the debate that I have with my colleagues back in Washington is that they just assume he's going to do that because that's what we would do. I mean, that's what we've been trying to do in Afghanistan by the way. He'll be content with a frozen conflict. As Professor Moser knows, he's very content with that in various other places so why would we not think he would do that here. And i think his strategy is reestablish sovereignty over the western part of the country, that's what he's doing now, both going north and south and that means bombing those people that we support by the way, but whether they then try to move against ISIS I'm not so sure about that. That's hard to know because that's the part that I think gets him into a more Afghanistan-like scenario. How long that can hold that's a different question. I mean I'm not sure that can be frozen so easily like Georgia or Ukraine given the nature of the organization Islamic State, but I wouldn't be surprised if they tried to do that for a long time. >> So what about the relationship between Putin and Russian society. We get a lot of reports about how popular Vladimir Putin is. And there's some debate about how real that is. My assessment is that it's pretty real. But there is a certain underlying development here with the economic troubles that there might be a point after which he becomes really vulnerable. I mean do you have any sense-- what's your sense of that? >> Well I too, share the-- you know, reading the opinion polls and reading work done by some American scholars. He is popular and he's popular because the Russian people believe that they are being taught--fighting a war with the West. Nazis and Ukraine and us. And that's the way it's being framed. And people all over the world. There's nothing particularly Russian about it. But people all over the world, rally around the flag when you go to war. George W. Bush was at 92% when he went into Afghanistan if I'm not mistaken and I think he was around 75% when he went into Iraq. So that Putin, that 80%, that's fairly normal. What I don't know is a couple of things. How long it lasts and how long people will tolerate this economic difficulties in the name of these, fighting these wars. I think, you know, comparative historical experience would suggest that that support will wane and there's already some evidence suggesting that it is waning. I think we also need to be clear that, to express your preferences publicly in Russia today, is dangerous. And so when some random person calls you from Moscow, and says "hey I'm doing a poll to find out do you like Putin or not" And everyone in Russia knows that unlike in America, maybe we are just come to this. But in Russia, everybody's phone is tapped. Every body knows that and a stranger from Moscow calls you and asks you "do you like Putin?", there's really only one rational answer to that question in my view. But that means that there could be discontent below the scenes. Below the surface. And even just anecdotally, you know my conversations with Russian business people, no body is happy about this current situation, right? They tolerate it, maybe they think it's necessary but there are very few people that think this is a great outcome for Russia. And the fact that he is trying so hard to lift sanctions, suggests to me that you know, these sanctions are painful. Having said all of that, I would just remind you and your students that there's no alternatives to Putin, right? It's just hard for people to even imagine another leader. He's been around for so long, they other people are so discredited. There's no if you don't like Putin, there's no Fox news now, to go and talk about it out there, right? There's no Sean Hannity, criticizing the president of Russia, the equivalent. So it's hard to kind of develop those kind of preferences in a more mass way. The Parliament completely controlled by Putin, and therefore, it's just hard to imagine an alternative. And therefore I think that means he'll be in power for a long time. >> Yeah I think I would agree with that. I'm curious, we're coming to the end of our time, but do Russians and do you think Putin have any sort of opinion about the current competition for say, U.S. president today? Do they have preferences? Do they-- you know, does he really like Donald Trump I mean what is your sense of that. >> Yes, I think they do. I mean I follow the Russian press and the Russia social media pretty close, and they like Trump. They think Trump will be good for Russian interests and you know, compared to the other candidates, I think they are right about that. So that's pretty clear. I was just in a meeting last week, with lots of Russians and you know they joked about it. But then they asked me "is this serious" because they think he's the one candidate that could change the kind of confrontational mode we are in right now. >> Yeah, you know and so it's really interesting, I was curious about that. So we appreciate all the time you spent. >>Sure >> I know you are a very busy guy. It's been great hearing your thoughts and I'm sure the students are going to appreciate these insights. So thanks again. >> So thanks for having me and tell all your students, if they want to continue these kind of debates to follow me on twitter. @McFaul There's always a lively debate there. Usually about 10 o' clock my time. When the Russians are just waking up and sometimes it's in Russian, but I'm trying to move the conversation more into English so follow me @McFaul if you want to continue this. >> Great, Thanks a lot >> Alright. Thank you guys. Bye bye. 