 What are the major obstacles to economic development in the world's poorest countries? Well, there are a lot of them and the factors I've discussed here do not comprise a comprehensive list. However, it's a good exercise to make a list to understand how very complex the task of ending the cycle of poverty. In a very poor country can be. So first there is the so called poverty cycle. Basically, this is the idea that low incomes start off a chain reaction that includes low savings, low investment and low productivity, that then reinforces low incomes and the spiral of underdevelopment. In this, poverty simply begets more poverty. Many people in developing countries focus on survival and subsistence production. They produce everything they consume, failing to get some of the benefits associated with specialization and trade in local or global markets. But this focus on survival also limits saving and investment, which then hinders their ability to get more efficient over time through say, a capital investment. Like buying a tractor or a small irrigation system that could increase agricultural productivity. So in many developing countries where individuals are focused on subsistence production, they're producing everything that they consume and they don't have anything left over for investments that might raise their productivity. And then allow them to engage in more market-based transactions, either locally or on an international sense. A second poor governance is a central cause of poverty. And poor governance is often manifested in corruption, weak state capacity, or just plain incompetence on the part of government officials. Corruption creates uncertainty about government responses to economic success. In short, will the government official demand a bribe from successful entrepreneurs? This threat, and when there is an illegal infrastructure to prevent corruption, or to constrain bribe seeking political officials, these possibilities can limit investment and new business development in many developing countries. A whole range of problems also arise from adverse economic structure, and you might think about this as mono-economies, that often revolve around one commodity like coffee, or even natural resources. And so what happens here is, you get a limited specialization within that economy because the entire economy comes to depend on the exports of say coffee, or exports. Everything goes fine when those commodity prices are stable or when they are increasing. However, when those commodity prices fall, then when we think about this in terms of falling oil prices, then everybody working in the oil sector is likely to feel pain. It's gonna be more difficult for those firms to make payments and, to their workers, and they might have to lay people off. And all of the subsidiary industries that support, then, the oil industry, they also get hurt as well because the main engine of cash, or revenues in this sense, oil is collapsing in prices. So what happens is, when you have these mono-economies that are more prominent in the developing world, they become very dependent on a single export like oil. And then we get these rapid shifts in commodity prices because it's a global economy. And this can create lots of instability in the developing country and can create huge problems for the government because their revenue stream, the taxes or where they get their money to pay for their social to pay for governmental policies, they are often also dependent on the price of oil in this case, which can create huge problems for them when the oil prices fall. Now next there is the problem of weak property rights in many developing countries. Without strong property rights, individuals and firms have no incentive to accumulate capital and invest in the domestic economy. And how do you have strong property rights? You need a stable legal infrastructure. You have a mean, you need to have a means that can protect individuals when someone tries to steal their property or say when the state tries to capture some of their prop-, their property through corruption. Weak property rights limits investment. It makes it difficult to accumulate capital and can lead to capital flight, for anybody that holds financial capital in these countries, to safer markets, like the United States. So, political instability and civil conflict is also a problem that is often endemic in poor countries and contributes to perpetual underdevelopment. Now poverty itself can spark civil violence, or it might be driven by other factors. However, there is little doubt that civil war and violence have devastating effects on domestic economies. Infrastructures destroyed, lives are disrupted or people are killed. The best educated and most talented in an economy tend to migrate or leave the country, and investment dries up. All of the basic inputs to production, capital, labor, and and the infrastructure get destroyed, or they leave the country, which undermines the long-term productive capacity of that economy. Finally, let's bring this back to weak infrastructure. Weak infrastructure is a big problem. Poor countries tend to have bad roads, bad schools, bad sanitation, bad social services, bad public safety, all of which hinder, limit investment contribute to less human capital, and fewer incentives for entrepreneurial activity. 