 I'm pleased to introduce Professor Mike Findley this morning from our department government here at UT. Mike is an associate professor with broad interests in international relations and the co-director for innovations in peace and development here at UT, a news center that has been extremely active in integrating undergraduate students in scholarly research on development. Mike has done extensive research on civil war, terrorism, international law, international development, and the use of experiments more broadly in political science. One of his biggest set of projects though is an ambitious data collection effort designed to enhanced our ability to assess the consequences of foreign aid. This work has led to Mike's frequent collaboration with such organizations as the World Bank, the African Development Bank, and now the government of Columbia I believe. We have invited him here today to talk some about some of his work on foreign aid and so let me first just begin by thanking you for joining us Mike. >> Thanks, Pat. Thanks for having me. >> We appreciate it. We thought we'd start with an easy question today. Could you just give the students some sense of what these foreign aid projects look like on the ground from your field work, say in Africa? >> Yeah, sure. I'm not sure that's the easy question but we'll start with that, right? So first the world of foreign aid is extraordinarily complex, right? I mean the numbers of actors involved in giving foreign aid ranges from countries such as the U.S., the United Kingdom, Norway, Sweden, others, all the way to the international organizations such as the World Bank, the African Development Bank, Asian Development Bank all the way down to nongovernmental organizations, Gates Foundation, religious groups, and so forth. All pouring foreign aid into countries and then once this money flows into countries then there's another sort of set of difficulties I guess that, you know, these recipient countries face and part of that is that most of these donors at the international level have country offices, right? So the World Bank has a country office, U.S. Aid would have a country office. Many of these nonprofits have country offices and so forth. And you know different donors run the money different ways, right? So the World Bank in particular, you know, funnels most of its money right through the government of a recipient country. Donors like the USAID, you know, sort of bypass the whole government and go right to work with like nonprofits implanting partners and so forth. And then, you know, as many donors as there are, there are probably, you know, that many different kind of channels of delivery. And then you know, of course, the foreign aid can go for all sorts of activities so a data that you mentioned has something like, we have a code book of I think a thousand different purposes of foreign aid and so you know I mean this goes from everything from you know high level budget support all the way down to you know handing out things on the streets and you know we could go into more complexities but just to give a couple of examples-you know the World Bank as I mentioned funnels most of its money through the government. In Uganda a few years back we decided to go and take a World Bank project and actually just try to trace this project all the way from the time at which it was committed, the funding was committed, all the way until it actually hit the ground. And it was a health project and we had information on the locations where the aid was actually supposed to have an impact, right? So this would be health clinics that were supposed to get aid. And we went out to these health clinics and asked them about it and they searched through all their records and found no evidence of World Aid funding, right? So what does this mean? It might mean that, you know, some corrupt official took it. What it probably more likely means is that the World Bank sends us money through the national government and then expects the ministries to actually go out and implement projects, right? So in this in this particular case you have a project that's-you don't see a lot of it just because it's, you know, funneled through a ministry it probably ends up sort of, you know, running a clinic and so forth. Then there's a lot more micro level interventions, you know, Minnie and Chris Blattman does a bunch of these. Rob mentioned this I think earlier. You know do a lot of these sort of micro level interventions. Some classic ones in this area are, you know, trying to reduce teacher absenteeism in places where teachers aren't getting paid much or for other reasons they may be getting paid but they don't show up and so a clever intervention that some researchers came up with with the help of some foreign aid donors was to use cameras and actually give cameras to teachers in schools and condition their paychecks on getting a picture of them standing there with the students in the morning and in the afternoon every day and these are cameras that are time stamped and they proofed them so that the teachers couldn't actually, you know, sort of mess with the day and time stamps. It was a really interesting intervention, you know, and it reduced teacher absenteeism, you know, the kids tests scores went up pretty significantly and so forth so you have everything from high level, you know, send it through the government to very low level interventions such as these. >> So I want to followup on what you're talking about the bureaucracy because this bears on one of the readings that our students talked about today and we read this Blattman piece in foreign affairs from this fall where he basically says let's just give cash because there's so much wasted in the larger infrastructure, bureaucratic infrastructure associated with foreign aid. Do you see a lot of that and do you kind of agree with that position? Better just to cut out the middleman and hand off cash or- >> Yes and no, I mean, you know what can cash do, right? Cash can do certain things. It can't do everything that we need to do, right? And so we, meaning, you know, the development community wants to do. And so certainly, you know, I think there's been a number of studies that have shown just how beneficial these cash transfers are, conditional and unconditional, and that's great and we should continue to do those and cut out the bureaucracy where possible. I used to be more skeptical about the bureaucracy mostly from visiting the World Bank in Washington, D.C. and you know learning my first trip there that it wasn't one World Bank right, that there's multiple buildings right, and these amazing buildings and they're huge and they're full of employees, I mean thousands of employees there. And then there's country offices everywhere too, right, and most donors are this way. And so it's a little overwhelming. I mean the bureaucracy is quite overwhelming to see this stuff but I think most people are generally you know sincerely trying to you know to commit and disperse foreign aid the right ways. >> So the next thing I was hoping we could get you to do is we read some skeptical stuff today about foreign aid. Could you give us some sense about the benefits of foreign aid from the literature? What do we know from the academic literature about some of the benefits? >> Yeah, so I guess as backdrop to this, you know with a million projects that have occurred, you can find all sorts of failures. Right? I mean you know no matter how good foreign aid you know every could be you're going to find failure projects and too often I think these get picked up and reported on. Clearly there are failures and big failures at that, right? But sort of inferring too much from the anecdotes, I would just sort of caution everyone against that a little bit. On a larger scale, most of the research has tried to understand whether foreign aid, sort of aggregating like all foreign aid going into a recipient country and that country's growth economically and found very mixed results on you know on whether it actually helps or hurts. But I will note that one of the most recent articles in a long series of articles here trying to deal with all the methodological complexities, data complexities and everything else-actually this recent article has come to the conclusion that on [inaudible] that foreign aid has actually had a positive effect on economic growth. I'd also be cautious about that too, right? I mean aid is a fairly small intervention to change something as big as economic growth. But, I mean some are arguing still that actually aid is having a positive impact on a macrolevel. What are we doing right on a more microlevel. So first I guess a general kind of statement and then a couple of different examples. The development community has really began to take seriously impact evaluation which is something that you know, development did not do up until a few years ago. Most projects of these, you know, take these million projects, most of them had some evaluation at the end but it was typically if, you know, the World Bank implemented a project it sent two or three of its own people out at the very end of this to walk around, kick the tires so to speak, as a few questions and then come back and file a report at the World Bank office. And you know this wasn't taking anything seriously and this is why people like Bill Easterly have been very upset about things. In the past maybe decade I guess, you see a much more sustained focus on trying to do real impact evaluation. This is getting fully independent third parties to be able to come in not after a program is implemented but ahead of the time, you know, so that you can do baseline surveys and midline surveys and inline and have no restrictions whatsoever on what gets published and what doesn't get published. And I think this has produced an incredible effect in development over the past 10 years in the sense that people are hyper-aware of this now and are thinking very, very hard when they plan a program to begin with about all the things they need to do to design the program correctly, right? How do we learn from the past and importantly how do we learn from what we're doing moving forward. And while you know while that's not you know impact evaluation isn't a save life so to speak, right, you know, potentially these impact evaluations will hopefully drive much more responsible and accountable programming moving forward. But we can you know we can look at lots of different examples out there. I mean a lot of health interventions have been tremendously successful. I think the work that the Bill and Linda Gates Foundation are doing in particular, it's been, I mean you know they've taken a lot of these things maybe following sort of Blattman's advice ahead of time anyway. I've actually gone out and tried to cut out the middleman so to speak right and just gone out into communities and just delivered vaccines and masks and done incredible work in this regard. There's been some really interesting market-based solutions to some of these things. So people like Paul Pollack [phonetic] who was a psychiatrist for 28 years and decided he needed to go out and you know fix problems in development describes how he spent the first year sitting around a room in Boulder, Colorado with a whole bunch of other old, white men talking about how to fix the world and then he has this epiphany of sorts, right, that he needs to actually go out and talk to people in developing countries and ask them what do they think they need, right, and then what's actually going to work within a local market basically. And so he goes to Bangladesh and does this amazing sort of background research where he just walks around for like three months and talks to people about what do you really need most and after three months they come to the conclusion that what they really need is they need to be able to get one more crop each year, right? They could get something like three or four crops in a year but they didn't have enough water to get a one final crop but if they could get that last crop then they could actually sell that for cash, right? And then with that cash they could use it for all sorts of things. I mean, think, you know Blattman, what's Blattman arguing here. You know, it's tough for Paul Pollack to control the weather, right? But what they did do as they researched more is that they found out that there was an incredibly high water table. It was something like, I don't know, 10 or 12 feet down or something and they worked together with other people and fashioned this thing they called a treadle pump, so think of like a stair master at the gym, right? You know? Out of bamboo basically and they just piped this thing right down into the ground 15 feet and then people would go out there you know in the non-rainy season and get on this thing for a half hour, an hour a day. They'd burn some calories, right? And then the water would come up and in one hour a day they could irrigate an acre of land, right? And so they were able to get a million and a half people to be able to get another crop you know each season. And this was pretty incredible. And they priced this thing-I'm probably missing the number here, but it was something like eight dollars which you know, that's not trivial to someone in Bangladesh but that's doable, right? I mean it's way more doable and they didn't rely, you know, they didn't rely on long-term subsidies and things like that, they just integrated it right into the market. I could give other examples but there are lots of really neat micro-interventions that are occurring right now. >> That's great. So I'm going to ask him one more question and then we'll go to the discussion board. Can you give us some sense of what you think, going to Washington, D.C., what do you think are the big foreign policy interests that drive American aid decisions in the United States? >> Yeah, so certainly the literature shows that strategic interests drive a lot of foreign aid. I mean most of the U.S. decisions are based on these strategic interests. During the Cold War, unsurprisingly, this was you know sort of thinking about what the Soviets are doing, where they are, where they aren't, things like that. Since 09/11, a lot of this has shifted to thinking about the impact of terrorism, right, and then also in addition to terrorism just U.S. miliary intervention. So although we often maybe don't think of it this way, if you look at what's going or what has gone on over the past decade in Iraq and Afghanistan, I mean this has sucked up a lot and potentially most of the money traditionally spent on development, so some of it being implemented by the military, some by USAID, or you know other organizations. They're really there to try to secure, you know, strategic military type interests. >> So I'm hearing limited moral concern's driving American foreign policy on this? >> So there's a-yeah, so if you've seen the documentary Ghost of Rwanda which was filmed ten years after the Rwandan genocide there's an interesting clip in here where a woman leaves Rwanda and comes to Washington, D.C. and she, you know, this is in the middle to late part of the genocide, and she is able to get the ear of some people at Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C. and says, you know, you've got to come help us, you've got to come help us and one of the lawmakers there just looked back at her and said, you know, the United States doesn't have friends, the United States has interests and Rwanda is not an interest. I think that sums it up, right? >> So on that note, why don't we go to the discussion board? Alright. Let's see, Dr. Findley, one of the questions that a student asked was, how does the local government of the state, like where the aid is coming in, does it affect the effectiveness of that aid? So for instance if there is aid money going to democracy versus authoritarian regimes, is there any research that talks about how effective or how useful that money is in different kinds of regimes? >> Absolutely, yes. What we know is that the government matters a great deal. You know, this recipient countries, they're still sovereign states, right? Because they're still sovereign states, foreign aid donors need to get some sort of approval, I guess, to be there and what that means then is that you know for a foreign aid donor to be in a country either it needs to be very, very clear and very explicit about all the money coming in or at least needs to have some sort of approval to be operating there and in which case there's going to be oversight of what happens right and but in some places, I mean for many donors like the World Bank, they typically require their local government's co-sponsor projects, right, so a bunch of the money that is used for an intervention actually comes from the Uganda government. And so the Uganda government becomes a key stakeholder in what actually takes place there and as you might imagine, once you become a key stakeholder and the money starts flowing through your government, you can do lots of things with this, right, and Uganda like many, many other countries-Uganda by the way is kind of a semi-authoritarian, semi-democratic, sort of leans a bit more authoritarian despite having elections-you know has been implicated in all sorts of things where it's tried to, you know, take money when it shouldn't so, you know, Mobutu who led Zaire, now the democratic republic of the Congo for many, many years, they estimate that he stole a full 6 billion dollars of foreign assistance that traveled through Zaire at the time. You know, it was funding things like his daughter's wedding in Zimbabwe or wherever it was. I mean so yes, the local governments matter a lot and generally I think, you know, I mean people are highly skeptical of authoritarian regimes and their ability to not to siphon off money but- There's a lot of semi-democratic-- >> Russia was notorious in the early 90s under Yeltsin which was more democratic than successor of leaders, right? But you know, foreign aid there kind of went away, went somewhere, not to where it was intended to go, so. Illiberal democracies don't have a very good record of this either I would imagine right? >> No, no. No they don't. >> And then the stable ones don't need in foreign aid. Or usually don't and so it's kind of hard to compare. >> Yeah. Well, and I mean just to be, I mean to be frank on this too, right? I mean even stronger, countries that are stronger democracies, more liberal democracies, people figure out a way to get their share somehow right? It just moves from illegal means to more illegal means, right? And this is maybe what Blattman, you know, Chris Blattman and others are highlighting, right, as the, you know, it may go through once democracy becomes more liberal in a sense, right? You still have ways that the bureaucracy within a country can capture a lot of that funding as it goes through and there's notorious examples of you know 100 million dollar projects that turn into a few million dollars by the time they actually, you know, reach the level of individuals. >> Okay. So we're are almost out of time but I thought do we have one more question on the board? If you have to, or no? >> I do. >> Alright, so if you have to log out, go ahead and log out. There's no quiz today. But let's take one more board and if you've got to come back, just watch the video later but go ahead Bryan. >> So Dr. Findley, I wanted to ask about the relationship, I know that part of your research is studying conflict in aid, so just any nuggets you guys have pulled out of that or ideas because it seems like there's obviously a pretty big correlation between where the aid money is going and conflict in those areas, so do we have any kind of idea of the causal arrow or just wanting to hear you kind of talk a little about what you guys have learned. >> Yeah, so a great question. Let me start and answer a slightly different question first, then I'll answer this one. One thing that's really, really important to note that's just been pointed out in the last couple of years now is that they're actually a lot of countries in the world that are developing, right? And we often look at development assistance and we think, oh it's a big waste, but there a lot of countries that are developing right now, but the countries that are developing are the ones that have not had violence, okay? The countries that are not developing, almost every one of them, right, has had significant violence in the past, some risk of violence right now and into the future, and so the data are really difficult to argue with here. And so in many ways what we care about most is helping precisely these countries that are engaged in a lot of, you know, intense violence I guess and which makes sort of this question all that more important to try to answer. And the short answer to this is, you know, it's only been the last year or two that we've actually had good information within countries to know like where aid is actually going. Up until two or three years ago, all we knew is we just had information about like national level disbursements and so we couldn't see, you know, where are rebel group stealing aid and using it, where were they not and things like that and so the existing evidence is out there currently at least for once a war is ongoing and donors are actually trying to affect the dynamics of a war finds that the foreign aid is actually positively correlated. In other words, the aid may be fueling the violence, right? And you know the suspected mechanism here that you know rebel groups can figure out how to get access to development resources when the go out. Let's see, was it I think two years ago, I was in northern Uganda and sat down with former leaders of the Lord's Resistance Army, so all the way up to Joseph Kony's number two general, and like a true nerdy social scientist I actually took maps with me and I sat down these former generals of the Lord's Resistance Army with maps showing then like where the development assistance was going through the war, where the violence was and just asked them if they could describe like you know, given a certain city what did you know about this. And I mean I honestly was shocked. In several cases they were able to say, yes we knew what happened there. We didn't know where the money was coming from but we knew that something big was happening there. We went and we did a raid in that city. We were able to use that to get all sorts of resources and then we ran back to the mountains after that. And to the point of him describing or they sort of describing what was actually in some of the projects that we had documents for, right, and so it's tricky right? And this gets back to the ethical issues, so do you stop taking aid there because they could get captured and sort of let people suffer potentially? Or do you go and try to alleviate suffering recognizing that, you know, some of the stuff might get captured? Sort of my last I guess caveat here is just to say that a lot of research needs to be done to figure out exactly what's going on here, but- >> So let me say thanks, Mike for-and just for the record, that's great research. This would be a great project to be a part of, so thanks so much for coming and talking to us today. We really appreciate it. 