 The other big debate here that we're gonna be talking about is the moral obligations or the practical ethics of development and foreign aid. And so, one of the, so there's really two kind of different critiques here about foreign aid and development. One, the one that we were. Just getting from Pat, here, is about the effectiveness of foreign aid. That, perhaps, the way that Western countries, like the United States, or Western inspired organizations, like the United Nations, try to help poor countries just might not be very effective. But the other, the critique about the whole issue of global injustice or, or global inequality the, the difference between wealthy countries and poor countries around the world, is the critique that affluent countries simply don't do enough to try to alleviate, alleviate, to, to, to bring down poverty in poor countries. And so what I wanna do in this next section is talk a bit about the moral obligations if there are any. That affluent countries, route, wealthy countries have to help to solve the problem. To, to end the poverty, or at least curtail and reduce poverty in poor countries. And we're gonna start with the thought and, and work of a philosopher, Peter Singer. Whom perhaps makes the strongest case for the moral obligation to help to alleviate global poverty. And Singer argues that the affluent, those who are in circumstances of wealth should use their resources to save starving individuals and, and very poor and, and destitute individuals up to the point of what he calls, marginal utility. And that is, what he means by that is, up to the point when it involves sacrificing something of equal moral value. Now think about this. This is a pretty radical position. That calls on wealthy countries and their citizens to transfer large portions of their wealth to poor countries. And Singer bases his conclusion on the analogy of a scenario of an individual walking past a pond with a drowning child in it. Right. And so he's, he's arguing that one should perceive global inequality in more approximate terms. And he says, imagine then, that you have a wealthy individual or any individual, who's walking past a pond with her drowning child in it. And he argues that, there is a moral obligation, by that individual who happens to come upon a drowning child, to save that child. That they should put in the effort to rescue the child. Now he argues that in the 21st century, with all of our mass media and all the information, and 24-hour news cycles and the like, that we know enough here in the United States and the, and other citizens in other western countries know enough about the world thousand mi, thousands of miles away. To know that there are thousands of children literally dying from all sorts of maladies right now. And he says that, he argues that physical distance, the fact that we aren't there physically to see these tragedies. Does not, and let me emphasize this, does not relieve us as individuals from our moral obligation to help. And so what he's arguing is that metaphorically, we are walking past drowning children every day. That we know, that there are people suffering because of dire poverty and dying because of dire poverty, and that we have excess wealth here and we are not using that to remedy the situation. And so, what Singer argues is that not that is based on his argument for much more extensive aid from the west and from wealthy countries to poor countries. Much more extensive aid is based on two assumptions. That we know they're suffering around the world, and that we have the capacity to do something about it through a rather simple act that is made easier through the internet and in all of the modern convenience that we can simply donate money to aide agencies with the stroke of a mouse, right, and help to relieve this. And so Singer argues, also that there is no difference than between what he calls negative violence, and positive violence. And what does he mean by this? He sees no difference between letting someone die, if you could prevent it, and murdering someone. And this is a radical position, right? Or, or, you know, one that a lot of people would, would question. So, in his example, there's no difference between not saving a drowning child you happen to come upon and pushing that child into that situation, right? And so this is a philosophical position, right, and of course that is quite debatable and so let's put that off for now and, and look at the other position. So based on the, the bottom line here is based on these assumptions. Peter Singer argues you must do all that we can to alleviate poverty and inequality. And so there's one position that the, the west and wealthy countries have a lot of excess capacity, have a lot of excess wealth and that there's a moral obligation to do more. Right. So, what about the other side of the argument? Now I'll offer three common arguments against Peter Singer's position about the moral obligation to help alleviate global poverty. First, from the practical perspective, there is the problem that foreign aid tends not to work very well, as we have already seen examples of from your reading and from earlier lectures. It does not address the root problems of underdevelopment. Arguably, there's no moral obligation to support aid programs if the aid provided does not produce outcome, or perhaps makes matters worse. And so if by simply donating money to aid organizations, you're not gonna alleviate poverty, you're not gonna save that drowning child, then you don't have a moral obligation to do it. Secondly, from the libertarian perspective, there is no moral duty of benevolence toward others in one's own county or elsewhere, and you can see this from a couple of perspectives. First, remember the distinction we raised at the beginning of this course between ethically prohibited and ethically permissible actions. And then also ethically ideal actions. It may be the case that doing nothing to alleviate global poverty is not ethically ideal. It's not the heroic thing to do, but it is ethically permissible from a certain perspective because someone, or some country that is not contributing foreign aid is not actively causing the harm approaching people to live in poverty. They are not causing the poverty. They're just choosing not to do take strong a, a, action to alleviate it. So second, from the libertarian perspective also Is that freedom trumps charity. People are surely allowed, from the Libertarian perspective, to be charitable to others. But they cannot be forced or coerced, including through taxation, to do so. That violates their rights and, and freedoms. So that's the second critique against massive foreign aid, right? And finally, from the local perspective, there is the argument that obligations are not global. We have some obligations to the people of our own society, but these don't extend to, or are at least weaker than, our obligations to people outside of our own community or outside of our own country. Many argue, and you see this argument quite often, that we have poor people right here in the United States and should take care of them rather than sending millions of dollars overseas. This is a typical argument of this perspective. So in conclusion, about the practical ethics of development, let me offer a few points. Most people wouldn't go as far as Singer. Even though giving as much as we absolutely can may arguably bring about the greatest good and minimize the most harm, something more or less con, consistent with the utilitarian approach, the obligation to give until you actually hurt, meaning you can do without a car if it means saving the lives of, of children. It's simply too great in most people's minds. Most people also, though, on the other side of the spectrum, wouldn't object to a stricter or extreme Libertarian perspective that we have zero, no moral obligation at all, to alleviate extreme poverty and suffering around the world, because it infringes on our liberty to use our own wealth however we want. But there is a wide range, arguably, of positions within sort of the ethically permissible actions that would fall in between these two perspectives. There is a disagreement about whether we should focus our, our help, whatever help is chosen to be made, locally or globally, which would be an example of sort of the debate within the common good approach. This choice, though, depends on our understanding of ourselves as citizens of a nation or of citizens of a global community. Most practical ethics perspectives favor the latter, a global perspective. This is based on the notion that we are all human, with the same vulnerabilities and potential for doing good, right. For this reason, we from that perspective, we'd have a moral obligation to help any other human and should not and we should expect the same in return, regardless of national borders. So if we accept this, that there's a moral obligation to help, we should shift the discussion arguably then to how we can help and how much we should help. Your readings argue that the current foreign aid system is, is not functioning very well, and most scholars and commentators tend to agree. The solution depends on local and foreign government aid programs coming together, arguably to focus on sustainable development in extremely poor areas so that they can move away from dependency on foreign aid toward more autonomy. This would best meet the demands of ethics and of the practical arguments surrounding aid programs. Now how to make it happen is a harder question. 