 What started this crisis? How did the U.S. get out of this crisis? And what are the lasting international and political consequences of this crisis? We're going to examine these questions in a quasi-interview forum with me asking Pat here, who is the economics expert, I guess, in this team here, a few questions about this financial crisis, and perhaps prompt a discussion. So, Pat, first why did this crisis start? >> So, I think the first think to realize is that the crisis was U.S. centered; the United States bears the brunt of the responsibility for the origins of the crisis. It started here, in the housing market, and then it was transmitted to the rest of the world. And it stemmed from a financial system that had become increasingly dependent on mortgage-backed securities in the decade following 2000. The appetite for banks of these things exploded in the years leading up to the crisis. But, importantly the value of these loans depended on the value of homes. So when home prices started to correct in 2006, the value of these bonds started to fall, and the problem was that in this period from about 2001 to 2008, the balance sheets of the largest banks in the United States depended on the profits they were generating in mortgage-backed securities. But all of these mortgage backed securities their underlying value was tied to the value of houses, so when houses started to correct and the value of houses started to fall in 2006, and people started not being able to make their mortgage payments, what then happened is banks took over these houses and because there were then too many houses for sale in neighborhoods, all of the value of the existing homes fell as well. Well, this eventually pushed down the value of these mortgage-backed securities and hit the bottom line for banks, whose profits had come to depend on this. And so, we saw a transmission of a slow down in the housing market that begins in 2006, and then it spreads to the banking system in the Fall of 2008. One of the things to keep in mind about this, and this is one of the arguments for the origins of this crisis, is that it was rooted in regulatory failures. There were tremendously bad practices undertaken in the financial sector, with respect to loans. Essentially, what was happening was the originators of loans, credit unions, well, credit unions weren't nearly as bad, as in the sense, housing mortgage companies that grew up in the decade after 2000, who would lend the money initially to homeowners, and then they would turn around and sell that paper to Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac or to larger banks in the United States. What these originators were doing was lending money to people that they knew couldn't afford to pay back the loan over the 30 year period. However, they were lending this money because they weren't holding any of the risk, they were selling those loans other banks and Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, and they were also telling people that, even though you can't borrow money, or even though you can't sustain these loan payments over the next 30 years, that's okay, because this is what you're going to do, you're going to take out a loan in 2005 in central California, on a house that costs $450,000, even though you're only making $25,000 a year. You're going to make the next nine months of payments, and when you can't make your 10th payment, what you're going to do is come back to us, and we're going to offer you a new loan, and we're going to be able to offer you a new loan, because in that 10 month interim period, the value of your house is going, say, to have gone from $400,000 to $450,000, so you're going to have new equity in that house, say an extra $50,000. So, we're going to extend you more credit, given that equity that has been created in the run up of the housing prices, and then you're going to take that new credit, and you're going to use that new credit, that home equity loan in a sense, to make your next 10 monthly payments, and then when you can't make your 11th monthly payment, we're going to do the same thing again. Well, why were bank, originating financial institutions doing this? Because they were taking a cut, a commission, say $5,000 every time a new loan was issued, but the problem was, they were lending money to people who couldn't pay those loans back, and eventually, when the housing market, the prices in the housing market corrected, those people wouldn't be able to re-finance their mortgages, because the only way they could re-finance their mortgages was if the value of houses continued to go up, but when it started to fall in 2006 they couldn't re-finance, and when they couldn't re-finance, they defaulted on the loan, and then those mortgage-backed securities fell in value. So, the whole thing is propped up by housing prices, and aggravated by incredibly shoddy lending practices among financial institutions. And this, then, brings up to one of the larger problems and one of the primary explanations for the financial crisis of 2008, what was going on, why were banks able to do this, and the argument was they could do this because the government did a really poor job in regulating them. There's famous quote by Alan Greenspan who was the Chairman of the Federal Reserve before the financial crisis hit, where he's interviewed by Congress after the financial crisis and they basically said, what happened? And he said, well, we made a mistake, and why did we make a mistake, because we believed that banks should have had the incentives to regulate themselves. What does that mean? The government didn't need to regulate the banks because banks were putting billions of dollars at risk. If they lose billions of dollars then they go out of business, so they should have had sufficient financial incentives to regulate themselves and avoid bad bets. Well, that clearly didn't happen, because the system was broken, because you saw a series of perverse incentives like the one I was just talking about, where originating lenders had no incentives to worry about the long-term sustainability of that loan, or whether the person could be repaying those mortgage payments in year 20 to 25 of their mortgage, because they weren't holding the risk. Instead, they were passing the risk on to bond holders, pension fund holders, in the United States and more broadly in Europe. Another explanation for the financial crisis, and this gets to the structure of international finance that Ben Bernake talked about as a global savings glut, and one of these competing explanations is that at its core, the financial crisis was a function of a huge imbalance of savings rates in the world, and so we have incredibly high savings rates in China and among commodity exporters, in part, because their governments don't have credible social security systems, and so in China you have huge savings rates, 30 to 40%, if you want to compare that to the United States, we're talking about average savings rates of somewhere between 0 and 5% over the last decade. And so, huge savings rates in China, they've got to have someplace to park their money; they put their money in Chinese banks, which eventually goes to the Chinese Central Bank, but the Chinese Central Bank has an interest in stimulating growth. How do they do that? By exporting goods to the United States. Well, how can we use our capital, excess savings sitting in our banks to facilitate those exports to the United States? Well, how about we buy mortgage-backed securities and Treasury securities from the United States? That'll push the value of the dollar up, facilitate American imports of Chinese goods. But, the consequences of this is it made credit in the United States cheaper and it encouraged engineering and innovation in the financial sector that leads to the full embrace of derivatives, like credit default swaps, that facilitated bigger, more riskier bets in the mortgage market. And so, you get this innovation... another way to think about this, is you've got this flood of capital coming into American banks... how do American banks make money? They make money because they're intermediaries. They borrow money from savers and then lend it out to people who need capital, and their profits stem from the differences in these interest rates. So, they've got tons of capital flowing in, they've got to figure out how to lend that money out. Well, how do they do that? How do they, in a sense, expand the demand for credit inside the United States? They do that by digging deeper into the pool of riskier investments. Rather than lending money to people with credit scores of 750, they start moving into the subprime market, taking on more risk, because they're sitting on these pools of capital. And so, prominent explanations for the financial crisis, first thing to realize is it's in the housing market, it starts in the United States, spreads around the rest of the world. Prominent explanations are really bad regulation of the financial sector in the United States, in part fueled by an ideology, the free market ideology, embraced by both Presidents Clinton and Bush, that the financial sector has an incentive in taking care of these things on their own. So, one explanation is bad financial regulation. And the second one is a deeper, structural imbalance in the world that we can tie to savings rates. Lots more, or high savings in China leads to capital inflows into the United States, which encourages innovation on the part of American banks. >> So, just to follow up on this, the narrative that most of the students are probably familiar with is the first explanation, this lack of regulation, this irresponsibility, by bankers in particular, giving bad loans, the big short, there is this movie out, I'm sure many of you know, based on a book that links the financial crisis to a bunch of bad practices, basically, by banks that should have known better, didn't quite see the end coming, because they assumed that the housing market would always be increasing in value, and so a lot of you... There was a question on the question board about this movie The Big Short and how accurate it was. That's part of the explanation. >> Yeah, and actually the movie is very accurate. It's based on a book by Michael Lewis, and essentially... >> It's really good, too. >> The book is designed, in a sense, to go back to patient zero, and in this case, patient zero is the original person that got the idea about how to make money from a collapsing housing market, how to short the housing market in the United States, and he wanted to go back and trace that idea, and that's what is it, it's a good book, I haven't seen the movie yet. >> I saw the movie, it's a good... I read the book, then saw the movie, it's a good movie as well, so, entertaining. So, but there are other explanations, that'll we'll talk... there was this demand for loans, right, that helped to fuel the bad practices, because when everyone's making money, you can't see why that would ever end. And then we'll talk a bit about another explanation at the end of this linked to the Iraq War but let's move on. So, we get into this huge financial crisis, and what did we do in response, I mean, the world was burning all around us, right? >> Yes, the world is burning in the fall of 2008, this takes off in September of 2008, and initially the U.S. government response is uneven, and so it facilitates, and like I said, so the housing market begins to dip in 2006, and when the housing market begins to dip the value of mortgage-backed securities begins to fall as well, and the problem in how it's transmitted to the financial sector is that the banks in the United States are increasingly dependent on these mortgage-backed securities and so it forms a large portion of their balance sheet. Well, when these loans, these mortgage-backed securities start to fall in value in 2007, 2008, then it starts to hit the big banks, and their bottom line, they start having problems borrowing money, because these huge banks they're borrowing hundreds of millions, billions of dollars on a daily basis to conduct their normal activities. So, in the spring of 2008, this starts with Bear Stearns, one of the big five investment banks at the time, they can't borrow any money anymore because everyone realizes they've got too many non-performing, or bad loans in mortgage-backed securities, and so what we see over the course of 2008 is an uneven response by the American government to these huge banking, or to these big problems in the most important banks, or largest banks in the United States. And so, the U.S. government organizes an orderly takeover of Bear Stearns in March, but then they let Lehman Brothers go belly up in September, a few days later... and the argument in September with Lehman Brothers is we can't bail out all these banks because they made a ton of bad decisions, we're not going to put taxpayers dollars on the hook for these banks. Three days later, the U.S. government bails out AIG, and so there's this inconsistent response that creates tremendous uncertainty in the financial sector, which helps to create the panic that occurs in 2008. So, the government bails out some of the banks, they let some of the other ones fail. Eventually, the Fed turns really aggressive in lending money to banks in need, but the problem is the Fed doesn't have enough money, and so the Fed has to then turn to Congress at the end of September. Or I should say, the Fed, in consultation with Treasury Department, they basically decide, we can no longer construct what they call a monetary solution to this crisis, we need a fiscal solution, what that means is we need Congress to borrow money to inject into the banks, and then the Bust administration goes to Congress to do this in the fall of 2008. >> All in the midst of a presidential election. >> Yeah >> Yes, and Congressional elections. >> An Congressional elections. >> Which plays into this as well, because there's a huge debate about bailing out the banks, right, and so why bail out these banks, and what does bailing out a bank of his size really mean? >> So you guys have heard the phrase too big to fail, and this was the case with the banks, and the concern was... And remember, you think about credit, one of the easiest ways to explain this is ask yourself, how many transactions you conduct on a daily basis solely in cash? >> None. >> None, or very few. So, I think I've got $20 in my wallet right now. >> I got zero, cause my wife took my cash. (laughter) Let me be clear, I make money, it just never... >> That never happens in our household, I don't know what you're talking about. Okay, so imagine, and this was what was getting talked about in the fall of 2008, you've got banks that are collapsing, but we rely on those banks to borrow money and to pay our credit cards and to pay, so when you buy something with a credit card, what happens? The bank that's the issuer of your credit card, they make that payment first and then you repay that bank, so that's a short term loan. In the fall of 2008, things were so bad in the financial sector and the largest banks on Wall Street were in the midst of a run, which, other banks weren't lending money to them and their stock prices were collapsing, it looked... they were on the verge of bankruptcy. There was a conversation about having to hold what's called a bank holiday, because the crisis was so bad, and this has happened in the past, what governments will do is, they'll close the banks. If they close the banks, the only transactions that then occur are ones that can be conducted in cash, so you can think about... >> And that's what causes the panic, as well, because your money's supposedly in banks, and it's that It's a Wonderful Life scenario. >> And you can't access to it, and so money, or the credit, the financial system, this is like oil in your car's engine. You pull out the oil, everything freezes up, you burn up your engine and the car goes caput. This is what was going to happen to the broader American economy in the fall of 2008, so this is why the government comes under tremendous pressure then to bail these big financial institutions out, because if they go belly up, the credit system collapses and the entire American economy depends on credit. Another way to think about this is, in September of 2008, so we've got, Bear Stearns collapses, Morgan Stanley is under attack, Lehman collapses, Goldman Sachs is collapsing in value, and what Bush's advisors are telling him in the Treasury Department, if we don't bail out Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs, General Electric is going to go bankrupt in the next two weeks. General Electric, this is supposed to be the industrial powerhouse in the American economy, why are they going to go bankrupt? Because the have financial arm, GE Capital, that's hemorrhaging money right now, so very quickly, in the span of a few weeks, the failure to bail out the largest banks in the economy was going to spread to the industrial or manufacturing sector and basically shut things down, so. >> There were stories about everything shutting, I mean, the whole economy just grinding to a halt. >> Yes. >> I mean, running out of money, ATMs, you couldn't even get cash, there was fears... >> The American economy was literally two weeks away from, a week or two from this happening in the last half of September of 2008, so, what does the U.S. government do? What do they do? The first thing is the Federal Reserve extends credit when it can. A big thing that it does, is it turns Goldman Sachs into a depository institution. Why is this significant? A depository institution is a standard, old bank. They have to pay for insurance that secure deposits by, what is it now, it's up to, the first $250,000 that you deposit in an FDIC insured bank, it's insured, they have to pay for insurance from the government, and so if they go bankrupt that insurance corporation will pay you $250,000. Well, Goldman Sachs wasn't a depository institution at that time, and as a consequence they couldn't borrow freely from the Federal Reserve, so in the latter part of September, the Fed turns Goldman Sachs into a depository institution to ensure that it could borrow money from the Fed, so the Fed starts pumping tons of money into these banks. The other thing that's really important is that Congress votes on a package, $700 billion, that then the Treasury Department has to continue with this bailout, and effectively, what the U.S. government does is it directly injects capital into the largest banks in the United States and the injections of capital came with ownership privileges and so, next time you hear conversations about American economy, private property, we've got to keep the government out, the only way we saved the banks in 2008 was essentially by making these banks into state-owned enterprises for the next... >> It was a government takeover of the banks. >> Yeah, it was government takeover of the banks, and the government took control, and had a lot of... I shouldn't say, they didn't control of the daily operating procedures of these banks, but they had enough influence to shape big credit decisions. >> And the reason they had so much influence is because they gave them so much money. >> Yeah. >> And so, one thing to realize about this is, who is doing this? You've got a Republican president, George Bush, Republicans in Congress as well, and the next question here is about the political problems associated with engineering a bailout, and the first point I would like to make, and then have you address, is, ideologically, this goes against every sort of fiber of being for much of the Republican party right, because this is always about, that party in particular is always about getting the state out of the economy, to make, to let the market, which is much more efficient at allocating goods and services than the state, supposedly, and so you had a Republican administration bailing out these banks and taking control of these banks, and that, there was a lot of political fallout, based on ideology and also on some political considerations here, so... >> So why did they do this, and think about the politics of how difficult it was, because, and this is something that we haven't mentioned, is when the Bush administration goes to the Congress and says we're on the verge of financial Armageddon, a new Great Depression, Congress blinks. They say we need $700 billion, and the first vote is no. And when that vote is released, Wall Street collapses, or tanks, I think it dropped like 800 points in span of 10 or 15 minutes, and everyone in Congress is, oops, we kind of made a mistake there; well, why? The challenge here is thinking about how the political incentives were not aligned with the economic reality of a tremendous crisis. Remember Rob mentioned that Congress is up for re-election. So Hank Paulson, who is the Secretary of the Treasury, goes to Congress and he has number of Congressional officials that say, you're right, Hank, we need to spend this money, we've got to save the banks. I don't like to do it, but we need do it, but I'm sorry, I can't vote for it, because I can't explain this to my constituents at home, that we just put $700 billion of taxpayer money on the hook for 10 or 11 banks that made horribly bad decisions with how they allocated capital, and so the politics of this didn't line up initially and the aggravated the crisis and more people loss a ton of money on Wall Street because of the failure initially to intervene. After Wall Street has this collapse, Congress kind of rethinks this, and basically says, we don't have a choice here, we're going to have to give the Treasury Department the money to inject capital into these banks. >> Right, okay, so they did eventually respond, they intercede with huge, state financial resources to save the banks. They also bailed out some automakers. The one big critique here is they didn't bail out individual, those holding mortgages who lost their homes. And so, there's a continuing sort of debate about bailing out the big players but leaving the little guy out. What's the legacy of this intervention and the larger international political consequences. >> So, the first thing, I think, we should realize, and I want to take some of the domestic consequences first, and then I'll come to the international consequences, because I'm seeing some questions pop up here, is so, there is greater regulation of the financial sector inside of the United States today. This strategy, and this was pushed by Tim Geithner, who was Obama's Secretary of the Treasury and worked at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York prior to that. The strategy that they adopted was one that didn't coincide with the tough language of the Obama election campaign in the fall of 2008. Rather than really constraining what banks could do, and one of the proposals on the table, was essentially these banks are too big to fail, they can create too much collateral damage and so what we have to do is, we have to break up the banks, make them smaller so that each individual bank can't take down the broader American economy. One of Obama's key advisors in all of this, who was a former Chairmen of the Federal Reserve in the late 70s and early 1980s that actually controls inflation coming out of the oil shocks in 1970s, says this is the only response, we have to break up these banks. Geithner pushes back on this and instead the strategy was we've got to recapitalize the banks, we're going to inject these loans into them and we're going to force them to hold higher capital ratios going forward. In other words, when they make bad bets, we're going to ensure that they're sitting on more capital so they can remain in business. Why is this significant, pushing up capital reserve requirements? Because that capital, if it's just sitting in the bank's vault, it can't be used to turn a profit, and so while these practices and this re-regulatory strategy helped to stabilize the financial system, in a sense, and it imposed some pain on the banks, in that they now have to hold higher non-performing assets, for many of the critics, this was not tough enough. And the larger structural vulnerability remains in place because we have consolidation in the financial sector. We still have these banks that are too big to fail, and so if there is some anticipated crisis moving forward, the same thing is likely to happen again because of the broader collateral damage, their capacity to bring down the entire American economy, if say JP Morgan Chase was to go belly up. So, domestic consequences, we got a compromise on the regulation of banks, and some of the vulnerabilities still exist, although hopefully they're less likely. Now, let me talk about the international political consequences. In about 2010 and 2011 a narrative emerges that this crisis had really sped up the power transition between the United States and China. In the fall of 2008, we saw a quick Chinese response, massive government program to increase spending that was designed to stabilize growth there. And so, in 2010, 2011 the narrative was China had come out of the crisis in much better shape than the United States, and 2009, 2010, the United States isn't humming along. You know, now we've got six years of sustained growth in the United States. I'm skeptical of that narrative, that the crisis, though, accelerated this transition in the United States. Instead, I think we can tell a story that the United States demonstrated real leadership. The recovery was tremendously messy, and the politics from say, the middle of 2008 and 2009 was messy. Congress had some important hiccups. It's created a larger debate about the role of the Federal Reserve, this is not something we've talked about, but the power of the... through the innovation, and this came up in the pre-class modules, through the innovation under Ben Bernanke's Federal Reserve, he probably augmented the power of the Federal Reserve to intervene and influence economic outcomes. This has been part of the push back from the Republican party, particularly from Rand Paul, about the Federal Reserve, and who knows, eventually there'll probably be some broader conversation or some legislation to try and take back some of that power. But the fact remains, I think, that the U.S. has come out of this crisis. The U.S. demonstrated leadership, and the politics was messy, but democracy here was flexible enough to prevent another Great Depression. And so, then, if you want, when we're talking about the international consequences, now we can compare the situation in the United States with the situation in Europe and Europe still hasn't, in a sense, sorted out the problems from the financial crisis and now those are getting, they're getting augmented by the migrant, the refugee problem and the same old challenges are manifesting themselves in both. A weak federal distribution of power in Europe, the absence of a central official that's capable, in the case of Europe you have central monetary system but you don't have a central fiscal system, is undermining their ability to respond to crises like this. And so, if we're comparing the responsiveness of the European system versus to the American system to these crises, the U.S. has done much better. I just saw there's a story, I can't remember, in the Post or Bloomberg in the last couple of days, the possibility of a Greek default on its debt has been opened up again, in a conflict between the Greek government and the IMF, so stay tuned. But I think the broader, I think, when you hear arguments about power transition, the financial crisis sped up American decline, I would push back on those, because even though it was really messy from 2008 to 2009 and 2010 if you look where we are 2016, the system was flexible, it adjusted. >> Yeah, it's an interesting, it's actually quite an interesting outcome here because the crisis started in the United States, the United States housing market, yet the United States and its economy now is one of the healthiest among advanced economies and not only >> And developing economies >> Yeah, and not only is Europe still a mess, China is having serious problems, the bastion of stability here is the United States, unemployment has gotten back down to regular levels... >> The U.S., in relative terms, the U.S. is not losing and its not a poor country. >> Right 