 Alright, so now let's transition and give you a third explanation for the financial crisis that is rooted in the brief reading that you had from the Washington Post today, which was an interview conducted with Thomas Oatley, who is political scientist, who argues that the financial crisis isn't about bad regulation, it's not about a global savings glut; instead we can tie the financial crisis to the war in Iraq, and we wanted to discuss this argument briefly because it reflects one of the big questions that we presented on the very first day of class. Namely, how do global events like war shape politics in the United States. Oatley argues that the Iraqi War brought the United States to the brink of another Great Depression in 2009. Again, what this tells us is that politics inside the United States is not insulated from these external shocks that we saw coming from 9/11 and then the decision to go to war in 2003. Okay, so how did the war cause the financial crisis? His explanation rests partly on politic disfunction or stalemate in the United States, over how to finance a rapid military expansion, and power emanating from the dollar as the principle reserve currency in the global economy, so let's take these two mechanism in turn. First, he notes that in the aftermath of 9/11, we had a quick consensus in the United States among politicians on the need to ramp up or increase military spending, in support of future military interventions following 9/11. Congress and the Executive branch, though, despite this consensus on the need to increase military spending disagreed over how to finance it. The article suggest three possibilities. Some people said we need to cut our way into finding new revenue, so we're going to cut other portions of the budget to find new revenues for the military. A second argument was tax hikes. A third argument is borrowing, and essentially what Oately claims is that a stalemate over these three options, the inability to secure a majority for any one of them, in a sense, created a stalemate that lead us in a deficit, that lead the U.S. government to adopt a deficit financing strategy, and this is also consistent in part with the preferences of the Bush administration because they didn't want to increase taxes and slow down the American economy while trying to fight what could be a long, extended conflict against Iraq. And so, you can see how this would also be a winning strategy, namely deficit financing, for members of Congress. When they get re-elected, or when they have to go back to their district to try and get re-elected, they don't have to face an angry, or angrier constituent base because taxes went up or important social spending programs were cut. And at the same time, remember, they're also worried the war going bad, and so they don't want to have to bring economic crisis at home as well, so what do we do, well, let's just finance the war through deficit spending by borrowing the money. So the U.S. opts to finance the war through debt. Where does this credit come from? One of the critical sources is capital flowing in from abroad. Foreigners are willing to lend the U.S. money, so this flood of credit and then greater government spending at home helps to facilitate an economic boom in the United States from after we get out of the early part of the Bush recession in 2001 and 2002, it fuels an economic boom, pushing employment levels up from about 2002 to the start of 2008. Now, these capital inflows that finance this boom in the American economy strengthen the American dollars. Again, foreigners were demanding more dollar-denominated assets so the dollar rises in foreign exchange rate markets. This had negative consequences though, for the manufacturing sector; higher values for the dollar raised the price of exports from the manufacturing sector. Consequently, the manufacturing sector becomes less competitive in global markets, and they have to lay off people and pushing employment levels down during this period because the global price of their exports, or the price paid by foreigners for American goods was increasing as the dollar was increasing in value. So, Oatley then argues that this inflow of capital in the United States has to get invested somewhere. If it can't go into the manufacturing sector, where does it go? Well, it goes into sectors that are insulated, or protected, from international competition, what were... That was housing sector and this is fueled by investments into government securities and mortgage-backed securities, and so the capital inflows into the housing market stimulate investment into the housing sector and then help to ramp up production in the housing sector, because it seems like there's a demand. These capital inflows also then encourage riskier lending pressures in the financial sector, that eventually bring the entire system down. So, when housing prices start to fall, in part because there's an oversupply of new houses, because, and here's just as a quick story, there's in 2006, 2007 every month or so, you can open an article in the New York Times or Washington Post talking about condo parties in Miami; what's going on? Baby boomers with tons of money, in New York City, are flying down to Miami and there's these huge construction projects, where you've got 200 or 300 condos coming on the market on a Sunday afternoon. In these condo parties, what these baby boomers would do, is show up at 2 o'clock, buy a condo, for say, $200,000, and over the course of a two hour condo party that condo would trade hands two or three times, and so the initial investment of $200,000 might net the person $250,000 Well, nobody was going to live in that condo, they're simply buying that condo because they thought they could turn it over quickly for a profit in a month or two, so what does that do? It stimulates and encourages builders to build more of these condos that people weren't living in, so we have an oversupply of housing, 2006, 2007, and the housing crisis for starts in places were this occurred, and where is this? This is in Florida, this is in Arizona, this is in Las Vegas, and this is in California, and so when the housing market corrects, they start losing their money, and then we get the transmission from the housing sector to the financial sector. Again, Oatley emphasizes that this entire process, and the relationship between war and the financial crisis was facilitated by the financial power of the United States. Because of the excess demand for dollars around the world, foreigners are willing to lend money to the American government and to American banks. This willingness for capital to flow inside the United States enables the U.S. government to launch a series of wars that the American public paradoxically supported, but was unwilling to pay for. So one last note here on the financial foundations of American power; keep this in mind when you hear politicians like Donald Trump arguing that the U.S. keeps losing and is always getting a bad deal and needs to renegotiate its military deals all around the planet. These arguments ignore the significant financial benefits that the United States receives from the dollar's position in the global economy, that then creates critical political and military benefits for the American government and how it interacts with other countries around the world. This power of the American dollar helped finance a war that the American voters didn't want to pay for. That's pretty good deal, and much better than any other country around the world is going to get. Finally, you should think about Oatley's argument in terms of the larger conversation we've had about the legacy of the Iraq War. That war expanded presidential authority, both relative to Congress and the American public. We argued that it helped create a deeper split within the Republican party. We also argue that it played a big role in transitioning the presidency from the Republicans to the Democrats. Failures in Iraq helped activate ISIS and fueled American reluctance to intervene in the civil war in Syria. And now, Oately is arguing that that war caused the financial crisis of 2008. Quite simply, the decision to go to war in Iraq was a monumental event in post-Cold War American history. Keep these consequences in mind the next time you hear a politician calling for war against another country. 