 Now, I need to say a few words about the use of ethical reasoning in this class. First let me say a few things about what we are not trying to do in this class. This is not a philosophy class. We are not trying to cover in depth ethical theories and philosophical traditions. Your reading introduces you to some of these philosophical traditions, but this course is not intended to be a comprehensive survey of such traditions and theories. Second, we are not trying to instill a particular set of values or moral principles. In fact the ethics flag, which this course satisfies, emphasizes pluralism of moral perspectives and tolerance of differences between such perspectives. Now, what are we trying to do? What we're trying to do in this class, with this component of practical ethics, is to engage with moral issues. Now, we're doing this in order to accomplish some concrete goals. First, we're trying to raise awareness of the ethical dimensions of different issue areas, in our primary subject of American foreign policy. Second, we are trying to help you to improve your skills of ethical reasoning. The ethics flag is intended to get students to move beyond an instinctual approach to ethics in which they rely primarily on how a certain choice feels. We will try to get you to think systematically about ethics and what it means for something to be right or wrong, or somewhere in between. And third, we are trying to help you to come to your own position on moral quandaries in American foreign policy. Now, how is this course going to help you achieve these three goals? To raise awareness, we will regularly highlight the moral dimensions of all sorts of foreign policy decisions. Of course, we will do this in issues of war and peace, but we'll also be looking at the moral implications of economic distribution of wealth, or the protection of the environment, or the promotion of democracy around the world. Second, to improve ethical reasoning skills, we will consider a variety of approaches to practical ethics, and ask a range of questions that are intended to stimulate a systematic analysis of ethical problems and compare competing approaches. Third, to press you beyond simply considering different alternative choices and to move you beyond that consideration to establish your own moral positions, we will engage in periodic debates on moral dilemmas. Most importantly, in your essay assignment, you will be asked to articulate and defend your position on an ethical dilemma in American foreign policy. Such as, whether the use of torture, or military intervention, for humanitarian reasons, is ever morally justified. Now, let's look at the five frameworks that we will be considering in this class. There are a number of different, and sometimes competing, approaches or frameworks to ethics. These frameworks are designed to help individuals organize and prioritize values so they can make decisions in a complicated world. One of your readings for this lecture lays out five different frameworks designed to organize choices that one might be confronted with by emphasizing certain values over others. These five frameworks are: utilitarianism, the common good approach, virtue, an emphasis on rights, and fairness. We will be using these frameworks throughout the semester to analyze ethical dilemmas facing U.S. foreign policy. Each framework emphasizes a different set of values when examining an ethical question, and thus provides a different perspective on what should be considered moral or immoral actions. So, let's look at each of a bit more in depth, First, utilitarianism. Utilitarianism is an approach to ethics, developed in the 19th century by Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill, that emphasizes taking an action that maximizes benefits or reduces harm for the greatest number of people. So, once again, utilitarianism is an approach that strives to maximize benefits, or reduce harm, for the greatest number. The common good framework emphasizes the collective good of the community. As such, it is very important how one defines the community A community can be local, it can be national, it can be global. Also, the common good can mean maximizing benefits for the most people, making this framework similar to utilitarianism, or it could also look at providing public goods for the long-term benefit of the collective. The third framework is thes virtue framework and it is centrally focused on cultivating values deemed desirable by a society. It can be viewed as an approach to ethics that promotes ethical habits. This approach is closely tied to an individual's or community's self image. For example, you'll see later in the class a debate of the use of torture by the American government in its counter-terrorist strategy. Senator John McCain makes the moral case against the use of torture by arguing that the United States is better than that. That it is a country that does not stoop to using such tactics even in the face of grave threats because such actions damage our collective virtue as a nation. It damages or undermines our self-image as a country that pursues and upholds high moral standards. Fourth, the rights approach emphasizes the idea that every person has dignity and specific rights that must be protected. From this approach a course of action is ethical if it respects these rights and is unethical if it does not, even if -- and this is crucial here -- even if there's only one person's rights that violated, and the remedy comes at a high price. This is an individualistic perspective, that often comes into conflict with more collective orientation or approaches, like the common good approach, or the utilitarian approach. Finally, the fairness approach emphasizes justice and equal treatment. It is most concerned about discrimination and inequality, and strives to treat each individual in the same way unless there's an ethical reason to differentiate or discriminate against certain individuals. Thus, as you can see, these frameworks come into competition and even conflict with one another. And the approach one takes to ethical dilemmas will have a great influence on what one sees as moral or immoral action. Now, let me clarify some crucial differences between two of the major ethical frameworks. Utilitarianism and the common good approach. These two frameworks have caused the most confusion for students because they have certain similarities. Now, it is true that both of these approaches, utilitarianism and the common good approach have a similar emphasis on collective goals. Both are trying to maximize the good for a large group. The key difference between utilitarianism and the common good approach lies in the definition of the group, or the community that is the target of these two approaches. The common good approach is centrally focused on defining the community. Who is in and who is out of this community. This definition of community then influences the decisions regarding what is ethically acceptable or not acceptable. For example, let's say the community is defined as the state, or country, like the United States, and the goal is to achieve the common good of public safety for this community. If the immediate threat to public safety was a deadly virus, let's say, located in another country far away, then it may be decided that the most ethical response to this threat of a deadly virus for the common good of protecting public safety in the United States would be non-intervention and the creation of barriers to prevent the spread of this disease to the U.S. homeland. Now, compare this with utilitarianism which is more concerned about maximizing good and minimizing harm for the most people regardless of which community they may or may not belong to. Using the same example, the utilitarian goal of maximizing good and minimizing harm would call for intervention, arguably, by the United States in a foreign country to contain the spread of a deadly virus that is killing thousands in that foreign country, even if there is a chance that some Americans could get exposed to the virus as well. Intervention would result in more "good," reducing the suffering and death of thousands of people that happen to live in, say, a country in West Africa, than harm, potentially infecting small numbers of Americans. Another example of the potential difference between the common good and the utilitarian approaches would be the provision of a public good. For example, building a dam to provide energy would provide a public good for a community, and that's maybe deemed to be the ethical action to take from the common good approach, even though building a dam may come at a cost of displacing many hundreds, or even thousands of people from their home. However, from the utilitarian approach of maximizing good or reducing harm for the greatest number, this may be -- this situation may be seen quite differently, and one might argue that the extra energy for the community is not worth the harm produced. So, again, both the common good approach and the utilitarian approach have collective sensibility or orientation, but they are different and the main difference is how one defines community. If the community is more narrowly defined, then there are greater differences between the common good approach the utilitarian approach because the utilitarian approach doesn't have that same emphasis on who is in and out of the community. Now, let me move on then to the next key aspect of practical ethics. Ethics and moral codes of conduct are based on values or virtues, which we will use interchangeably here as terms. Values are character traits that individuals, and or collective entities, like countries, deem admirable and praise-worthy. However, what complicates practical ethics in any give situation is that perfectly good values can come into conflict with one another. One cannot easily maximize individual autonomy, for example, and at the very same time, also emphasize the interest of the community. Often, justice and fair treatment of individuals leaves little room for mercy and the consideration of special circumstances. What is deemed good in the short-term may cause long-term problem. When facing a decision, the choices are most likely to involve a trade off between values, rather than a stark choice between what is clearly right and clearly wrong. And so, you can see this from an example -- a recent example from last year, over the spread of a deadly virus in west Africa primarily. The Ebola crisis. This is an excellent example of how complicated it is to determine what is most moral and ethical in terms of the course of action that is to be taken in the given situation. We can see in the debate over how to respond to the outbreak of the deadly Ebola virus how different values come into conflict with one another and how the five frameworks, to practical ethics, can help us sort through these competing arguments revolving around difficult ethical dilemmas. For example, when the outbreak of this deadly Ebola virus erupted in West Africa, the United States faced the decision over whether it had a moral obligation to intervene to try to help contain the spread of the virus, especially in Liberia, the West African country, with which it had the longest and strongest historical ties. Many observers, and ultimately President Obama, seemed to take a utilitarian approach to the problem, weighing the benefits and harms that could come with U.S. intervention in this crisis. And the slide lays out the benefits and harm of U.S. intervention that influenced this decision. There was the benefits of relieving human, particularly in the target country of West Africa, and preventing disease spread. Also there were political ramifications of the disease that could undermine the whole country and its economic system. All of those things could be prevented, arguably, by U.S. intervention. However, there were harms as well, including the risk that those soldiers, in particular the U.S. military, would get exposed to this disease, as well as there would be a strain on U.S. foreign policy, in the military, and the like, right? And so, in weighing the potential benefits versus the potential harms of this intervention, the U.S. government, under President Obama, made the decision to intervene. But there were other ethical dilemmas as well. For example, on a different issue, when western doctors, helping in West Africa, contracted the disease they were flown back to the United States and received special medical treatment that helped them recover from Ebola. This led to an intense debate revolving around the fairness and the distribution of medical care to those affected by the Ebola virus. Would there be a vaccine? If so, who would get this vaccine? If supplies were limited. And so, the fairness ethical framework emphasizes discrimination and how each individual is treated and the Ebola virus highlighted the fairness framework in the particular case of who would get treatement and who would not. Finally, there is the issue of the spread of the Ebola virus to the United States in particular. There were increased fears about the spread of this virus to the U.S. and other ethical questions then emerged and other framworks became relevant. Many feared that individuals traveling from West Africa to the United States, or health workers who may have come into contact with victims of Ebola, could start an epidemic in the United States. This led to calls for a travel ban and quarantines for health workers returning from their work in West Africa. Now, this debate highlighted the competition, or the conflict of values over individual rights of citizens, and the common good of the community. The debate over the ethics of state-imposed quarantine show the potential conflict between the common good of the community, which was trying to protect itself from a spread of the disease, and the individual rights of health workers that would have to be subject to state-imposed quarantines that they might not willingly abide by. And so, once again, you have this conflict of values between protecting the community goals, you know, the common good of a community, in this case the United States, and the rights of individuals. 