 One of the key things that we'll be talking about in discussing practical ethics and using these frameworks is this idea that values can come into conflict. And so ethics and moral codes of conduct are based on values or virtues like I just said Values are character traits that individuals and or societies and collectives and deem as admirable and praiseworthy. Right? These values are good things. Right? However, what complicates practical ethics in any given situation is that perfectly laudable values, perfectly good values can come into conflict with one another. One cannot easily maximize individual autonomy in the -- and the rights of individuals and also focus primarily on the interests of the community at the same time. On -- as another example. Often justice and fair treatment leaves little room for mercy or consideration of special circumstances. If everything is fair, then somebody's special condition don't get considered. So fairness can come into conflict with those sort of considerations. So what is good in the short term -- another example -- may cause long-term problems. So these things come into conflict. So when you face a decision, the choices are most likely going to involve a tradeoff between values, rather than a stark choice between an action that has these great values and an action that is devoid of other good values. Right? So values can come into conflict. Now, what I want to do in trying to get further into this is use an example. In the recent Ebola crisis, this crisis over a very terrible disease, the Ebola virus. It is an excellent example of how complicated it is to determine what is the most moral and ethical course of action to take in any given situation. We can see in the debate over how to respond to the outbreak of this deadly Ebola virus, how different values come into conflict, and also you can see how the five frameworks that we just laid out can help us sort through the competing arguments revolving around different -- different and difficult ethical dilemmas. So for example, when the outbreak of the Ebola virus erupted in West Africa, the United States was faced with a decision over whether it had a moral obligation to intervene in Libya, especially, because we have this strongest historical ties with that country, to help to contain the spread of the Ebola virus. Many observers and ultimately President Obama seemed to take the utilitarian approach to this problem when they were arguing about the merits of whether to go in or not. They weighed the benefits and the harm of intervention. The slide here lays out those benefits and harms as discussed in the media and the like over U.S. intervention and how to influence the decision. So when we were thinking about intervening, there were a lot of big benefits. So you can relieve human suffering and save lives. Literally, the United States could save thousands or even -- you know, hundreds of thousands of lives by intervening. It could help prevent the spread of the disease. In Libya, the whole social and economic system was breaking down, and a U.S. military intervention could help stem that breakdown and help to reduce suffering. It could help prevent what was looking like the reemergence of civil conflict in that country. And in addition to all of those good things for people in West Africa, it also had a benefit for the United States. It could boost our international and domestic image. Right? So it could be good for us a little, too. The emphasis was on all of the benefits it could have for those suffering from Ebola, and the reduction of the harm that that terrible disease was inflicting. However, there were costs, there were harms to this intervention. One of the biggest harms was the risk to American lives. Right? American military personnel would be at risk, and the like. It could overstretch the American economy. This would cost money. It could overstretch the American military and cause great distractions for a military that was fighting a lot of threats on a lot of fronts. And from the politicians' perspective, it had a couple of other risks or harms. There were political risks for the politicians making these decisions. You know, what if you intervene and, you know, didn't execute it very well? You could be a failure. You could create a lot of disappointment through acting and intervening and not carrying it out. And there was also this debate about the risk of a precedent. Where do moral obligations end? If the United States is not only the world's policemen, which is a big controversy, but also the world's doctor, right, or the world's emergency response team to every earthquake and every natural disaster, then how can the United States really keep that up and also protect its own interest and its own population? So utilitarianism helped to understand this Ebola outbreak and how to make an ethical decision about whether to intervene or not. But there are other issues and frames that came to the floor as well. One of the controversies that came up, sort of bolting into the news was treatment. A couple Western doctors contracted the Ebola virus and they were flown back to the United States -- in those cases that we're most familiar with -- they were given some quite novel and sort of experimental treatments, and they recovered. And then there was this great debate, is that fair? So the fairness approach came into it. You know, when you have a virus like this in which it can affect many, many people, and then you start to try to remedy that with things like vaccines, you get to this fairness approach of who gets the vaccine? Right? Who should get treatment? There was a debate about why did western aid workers get the treatment but Africa victims weren't getting it. How would you decide if a vaccine did come -- become available, if you didn't have enough vaccine for everyone that was inflicted by the disease or potentially inflicted by the disease? Do you start sorting them out? Young versus old, rich versus poor, urban versus rural, educated versus uneducated? These are really tough decisions. So the problem of scarcity, in this particular example about the Ebola virus brings to life how the issue of justice and fairness -- the fairness approach comes into play. Now, another example and the final example I'll use here is another question that arose during this crisis. When there was a threat and a perception that those who went to West Africa or those who were living in West Africa and might travel to the U.S., might bring the virus to the homeland, to the United States, how can we protect ourselves from that? Should the United States Government be allowed to impose quarantines on people who they might suspect as now being contagious with the Ebola virus? And these usually were healthcare workers that had potentially been exposed or even contracted the disease. What were the boundaries about the actions that the government can take? And this debate really showcased the competition between, say, the common good approach. Right? Emphasizing the values of the community, the collective, and the rights approach. There was a lot of heated debate about putting healthcare workers in an imposed 21-day quarantine against their will. Of course, you have to do that to protect the wider population. Others said that's an overreaction. Right? So it's easy when it is certain, that it is someone that was in West Africa would start the spread of disease in the United States. But the experts were very conflicted about this. Many thought that the chance of this was really low, and that's when the values conflict gets more heated, because it might be seen as an overreaction. The same thing goes in the political sense. Perhaps even if there is little to no threat of the spread of the Ebola virus, maybe us as a collective and us as a colony would just feel better if we put them in a 21-day quarantine. You know, if in sort of a majority expression of will, we might just impose that, but is that ethically defensible? Because, of course, there is also the problem of minority rights. And the final thing that I will note and then we'll move on, is the virtuous framework. When all this debate about quarantine was going on, one of the arguments against the quarantine was, look, you're penalizing the heroes here. If you go back to the first slide about the Ebola example, I put up "The Times" magazine cover because the Ebola workers -- those healthcare workers were named the person of the year -- persons of the year by "Time" magazine. And they did great work. But when we were debating whether to put anyone who came into contact -- with anybody that might have Ebola in the quarantine, one of the arguments against that was, you know, we are not cultivating the better virtues of this society. We should be encouraging this kind of behavior, not trying to diminish it. 