 ﻿1 This is the overview segment for our first substantive topic on the US foreign policy making process. It introduces four components segments that present basics set of concepts that we will use repeatedly throughout this course. The first lecture segment defines foreign policy. In this discussion, pay particular attention to the definitional differences among the beliefs, capabilities, interests and actions or behaviors of political actors. It will describe foreign policy as being directed at some combination of these attributes of foreign actors. You might think of beliefs as the organizing ideas that foreign actors have about the government and people of the United States. These beliefs shaped their expectations about future American actions. And as a consequence, they shape the foreign policies behavior of these governments. Capabilities referred to the power of foreign actors. Capabilities are often thought of in military terms. Power shapes the bargaining leverage that foreign actors possess relative to the United States and the scope of political concessions or demands, that they might make of the United States. We think of interests in political terms. Quite simply, what are the political goals of foreign actors? Do they want to promote democracy? Do they want to acquire nuclear weapons? Do they want the same thing as the American government, like the opening of markets? Or are their interests fundamentally opposed to the United States? And actions simply referred to the political behavior of other important actors in international politics. These political actors can be other governments like Russia. They can be transnational actors like terrorists, or they could be international organizations, like the European Union. Examples of political behavior might include a decision to send troops into a war. Or it could include the successful negotiation of an international agreement to reduce carbon emissions. The second lecture segment in this introductory group identifies the key elements of the foreign policy bureaucracy in the American government. The third lecture segment is design to answer an important question, what is the National Interest? The four segments discusses the reading that was assigned for this group of lecture modules and it's the Bush National Security Statement of 2002. This discussion uses this document to illustrate the concepts introduced in this module, and to transition into our future conversation about American Grand Strategy. After you watch this group of lecture segments, make sure you can answer the set of questions that are listed on the overview slide accompanying this introductory segment. Again, we encourage you to use these questions to structure your preparation for upcoming exams. As a means of concluding, we would like to provide a little bit of context for some of the references to current events pointed out in this group of segments. Lecture segments one through three were taped shortly after President Obama gave his State of the Union address in January of 2015. There is brief reference to the content of this speech. Additionally, this lecture segment also appoints to a speech that given to a joint session of congress by Benjamin Netanyahu in March of 2015. This speech generated a lot of controversy because Netanyahu was invited by John Boehner, the then speaker of the House of Representatives. The principle goal of that speech was to outline Israeli opposition to efforts by the Obama Administration to reach a political settlement with Iran over it's nuclear program. Finally, Ashton Carter is now the Secretary of Defense rather than Chuck Hagel. 