 On a broad level, when we talk about US foreign policy, we are referring to the actions and statements of the United States federal government that are directed towards some foreign audience. Often other political organizations, generally states. These policies are designed to shape the beliefs, capabilities, interests, and actions of their targets. As a side note, when IR scholars use the term state, they're referring to what you might think of as countries and not to what you might think of as states within the United States like Texas. The word country often refers to a geographic entity, while the term state refers to a political entity. Okay, so foreign policy refers to the actions and statements of the US government that are directed against actors outside of our territorial and political boundaries. An action might be the deployment of military force in war, or the deployment of military force on a humanitarian mission like we see in northern Iraq to protect refugees from ISIS. It could be the signing of some contract with another state, say the nuclear agreement between the United States and Iran. It could be a decision to shift financial resources in the federal budget from health and human services to the state department or the defense department. I would like to note, though, that I'm intentionally leaving the definition of what constitutes foreign policy here broad. Broad enough so that it includes statements by American political leaders. These communications are important because other governments will adjust their behavior according to the expectations that they have of US interests or future actions. Consequently, prominent speeches given by key members of congress or the president, as in the State of the Union Address, delivered at the appropriate time or in the right context can also shape what other states think and do by influencing what their beliefs are about American interests and the distribution of political power within the United States. So you can think of nuclear deterrence in these terms. During the Cold War, American presidents repeatedly sought to prevent the Soviets from invading western Europe with public threats to launch retaliatory nuclear strikes against Moscow. In the same way, we can call the State of the Union Address, given by a president every year, as an act of foreign policy. In Obama's last two State of the Union speeches, he requested congressional approval to negotiate trade agreements in East Asia that would challenge China's influence there. So these messages to congress and the American public also contained important messages for the Chinese government about America's economic interests and its willingness to defend its leadership role in the global economy. So the next element of foreign policy refers to its target or its audience. Generally in this class, we will be talking about American actions relative to other governments like that in Russia, China, Egypt, or Iran. However, there's no reason to restrict these targets to other governmental agencies. The target of American foreign policies can also include international organizations that posses powerful and often independent bureaucracies like the European Union or the United Nations. Or the target of actions can be private actors or multinational corporations as well. Sometimes, presidents will appeal directly to the people of other countries rather than dealing with their governments. President Wilson got a lot of trouble for this during the Paris Peace negotiations after World War I when he went around the Italian government and tried to appeal directly to the Italian people to put popular pressure on their own government. So foreign policy is designed to influence the beliefs, capabilities, interests, and behavior or actions of a foreign audience. So let me take each one of these components in turn. So what are beliefs and why are they important? Beliefs refer to organizing ideas that foreign actors have about the content of American interests and foreigners' expectations about future American actions. We all know that individuals on a daily basis adjust their behavior according to how they think others will act or interpret their own actions. For example, Rob goes through elaborate calculations trying to calculate how funny his jokes are when he's writing a lecture. He even tests these jokes on his own focus group at home. He then alters his lecture content on the basis of his expectations about how you will respond to these jokes. Will you keep listening to the content of the lecture in part because an old guy trying to be funny, is still kind of funny? Or will the repeated misses simply irritate you so much that you turn off the lecture and give us bad evaluations for the course. This is an example of how beliefs about an audience shape and actor's behavior. The same principle works for governments. US foreign policy is often designed to communicate you as intent, or the content of our interests, so as to shape the beliefs of foreign actors. Let's think again about the nuclear deterrence example. International political stability during the Cold War rested heavily on the stability of beliefs on the part of both the Unites States and the Soviet Union that each would use nuclear weapons if some severe violation of the political status quo in Europe occurred. American leaders worried that if Soviet leaders didn't believe that the US possessed the resolve to launch nuclear weapons, say if Paris was invaded, then the Soviets would actually carry out that invasion. Thus, a lot of the low level conflict during the Cold War, and you can make the argument that some of the escalation in Vietnam was about this. It was low level military activity designed to shape Soviet beliefs, to tell them that the United States was willing to sacrifice blood and treasure to protect Western Europe and contain Soviet expansion. So the picture in this slide here is meant to illustrate a conversation between President Obama and President Putin, in which the former is trying to convey to the latter American interests on an important policy conflict between the two of them, say over Ukraine or Syria. Obama is trying to convince him about the scope of American resolve to stay the course so as to encourage Putin to make some type of political concession. Now another way to think about the importance of beliefs in shaping social behavior is to think about one of the most taken for granted activities that occurs in the United States on a daily basis. Namely, the act of getting into a car to get to some destination. Your decision to do this rests fundamentally on your belief that the thousand of drivers that you will meet on the road share your desire to survive. And as the consequence will also drive on the right hand side of the road. So similarly, US foreign policy often tries to influence the beliefs of other actors to avoid the crashes on the road of international politics. In the same way, that our belief that other drivers will drive on the right hand side of the road leads us to risk our lives by traveling 75 miles an hour in close proximity to other cars. Beliefs are absolutely central to the coordination of social behavior. So next, why are capabilities important? Here we can illustrate this concept by thinking in terms of the relative balance in military capabilities between two political organizations. The military balance shapes the relative bargaining leverage that the two states possess if there's some political dispute between them. Consequently, the United States can use its military dominance to extract political concessions from other states. This negotiating power creates an interest in preserving this military advantage. The United States will implement foreign policies that are designed to limit the military and political capabilities of its adversaries. For example, the pursuit of a comprehensive sanctions regime against Iran to impose economic hardship is one such example of this. Iranian possession of nuclear weapons would blunt American military dominance in the region. Consequently, American foreign policy over the past few years has been oriented around preventing Iran from acquiring these weapons. Currently, the US is facing a similar struggle against ISIS. Given the hesitation of the American public to reinsert round troops in Iraq against ISIS, the US is instead limited to position military strikes in support of humanitarian goals and to support the current Iraqi regime to try and blunt the military advances made by ISIS. So the picture in this slide shows American military forces engaged in the battle, trying to undermine the military capabilities of the Taliban in Afghanistan. The point here is American foreign policy will be oriented around trying to undermine or limit the military capabilities of its targets. So what about the target interests? Target interests shape the complementarity of another state's political goals relative to the United States. Now obviously if two states possess the same foreign policy goals, they lack the foundations for political conflict with each other. Under this condition, we can expect deeper political corporation between the two states. For example, the picture in this slide is that of a nuclear reactor in Iran. I use it to reflect the interests of the Iranian government, the members of the Iranian government in their nuclear weapons program. Now obviously this nuclear program generated in intense political conflict among the US, Iran, and Israel, even heightening the risk of war among these parties. So this example illustrates why US foreign policy might be directed at changing the interests of a target population or a government. The emergence of common interests can build a foundation for corporation between the two entities that can then, in turn, eliminate threats to American national interests. Now finally, US foreign policy is also designed to alter or influence the actions of other states. Now the picture in this slide is that of Russian ground forces. You can think of this slide in terms of Russian's support for separatist forces in Ukraine. The sanctions regime targeting Russia in the aftermath of the crisis over Crimea was designed to alter Putin's actions to get him to restrict his support for separatists in Ukraine. 