 So let's move on to a different topic and briefly introduce the role that American institutions play in the making of U.S. foreign policy. If we think about foreign policy as directed at foreign actors and designed to influence these foreign actors' beliefs, capabilities, interests and actions, we also have to think about the process by which policies are implemented. And this specifically integrates American political institutions and the manner in which they regulate political competition and conflict within the United States. In short, the way that we organize our political system, especially how we organize our Executive Branch of government matters to American foreign policy. It influences the type of foreign policies that the United States produces. Now, I want to briefly identify the key sets of institutional actors within the Executive Branch. Of course, the legislature also is an institution that is involved in foreign policymaking, but we will discuss that and the legislature's role in detail later in the course. The president appoints the upper rung of the federal bureaucracy in a number of key agencies that are tasked with implementing foreign policy. These include the State Department, first and foremost, which houses all of the diplomats responsible for the day-to-day interaction between the United States Government and all the other governments, which the U.S. has officially recognized around the world. So when you go to another country, you need a passport. The State Department manages that process. When the American government negotiates an arms control agreement or a trade agreement, officials from within the State Department will be involved in the process. When the United States tries to broker a peace deal between the Israelis and the Palestinians, the Secretary of State generally states the lead in that process. Currently, the State Department is headed by John Kerry. He's pictured on the slide here. So the next key executive agency is the Defense Department. The Defense Department manages the armed forces of the United States. It is headed by a civilian, not a general, not a military officer. This fact has huge implications for civil-military relations. The relationship between the civilian government and the military. And many would argue the stability of democracy depends on this civil-military relation and the fact that the Defense Department is headed by a civilian rather than a general. We will talk more about this relationship, the civil-military relationship later in the semester. The Secretary of Defense oversees and works closely with the Joint Chiefs of Staff, which are the top military officials of each branch of the armed forces. The Defense Department has responsibility over the instruments of military force. Later in the semester, we are going to talk about how the threat and use of military force to settle conflicts is central to the generation and maintenance of political order. Now, just think about this in the context of Sixth Street here in Austin on Friday night. People can go out spending money, having a good time, in large part, because they can do so in relative safety, because there is a police force that enforces laws and keeps public order. Similarly, the American military protects American interests around the world. Because America's global political influence depends largely on the capacity of making credible coercive threats and implement them if necessary, the Defense Department plays a significant role in creation and execution of U.S. foreign policy. Currently the Defense Department is headed by Chuck Hagel, although he has resigned from that position, and President Barack Obama is in the process of nominating a successor. Yes, I'm current -- the IR here is worried. >> That was -- >> So. The Treasury Department along with the Federal Reserve -- this is the third agency that is very important in making foreign policy. State Department, Defense Department, third, the Treasury Department. Along with the Federal Reserve, managing the coordination of monetary policies between the United States and other states. During the financial crisis a few years ago, these agencies engaged in significant amounts of cooperation with finance ministries and central governments around the world. The Treasury Department is perhaps a little more unique than other agencies that we're talking about here because it obviously has significant domestic responsibilities. These include the collection of taxes, the paying of the government's bills, and more recently, engaging in significant borrowing operations, which contributed to the deficit, to ensure that all of those federal government's obligations are met. So over the past 15 years or so, this borrowing function has deepened the Treasury Department integration into foreign policymaking, because foreign actors, most notably, the Chinese government and sovereign wealth funds from around the world have been such an important issuers of credit to the United States. And so when the Treasury Department borrows a bunch of money to fill the holes in the budget, it engages a foreign policy because the entities that are buying -- or lending all this money are, in large part, foreign entities, in particular, foreign government. Now, in addition to those three agencies, the State Department, the Defense Department, and the Treasury Department, I'm including two intelligence agencies, that is the CIA, the Central Intelligence Agency, which is headed by John Brennan and the Director of National Intelligence, which is headed by James Clapper. The latter position, the Director of National Intelligence was created in the aftermath of 9/11 to try and centralize the coordination of a lot of intelligence agencies scattered throughout the American government. Obviously, the quality of intelligence gathering and its analysis plays a significant role in American foreign policy because it shapes the beliefs of our leaders with respect to what other countries will do. The Iraq War in the early 2000s illustrates this importance as mistaken intelligence about Iraqi weapons and their capabilities played a key role in mobilizing public support for that war. Susan Rice, who is pictured in the upper left of the slide, is our National Security Advisor, which is another important role. She heads the National Security Council, an organization housed within the White House that is tasked with coordinating all the foreign policy -- foreign policy agencies within the Executive Branch. The proximity of this position to the President, in the White House makes its director, the National Security Advisor, a key player in foreign policy. That person often serves as one of the first to brief the president every morning. For example, Condoleezza Rice regularly visited with President Bush and his wife in the residence at the end of the workday. More over, this position is unique to the others we just talked about, because it is not subject to senate confirmation. President Obama wanted Susan Rice, who is the National Security Advisor right now, to succeed Hillary Clinton as the Secretary of State. Her role in the public explanation of the attacks in Benghazi, Libya, however, activated significant opposition to this potential appointment within Congress. Congress was looking to sort of -- it was looking like they would block that appointment of Susan Rice as Secretary of State. So what President Obama did is he responded, simply by appointing her to a critical position, National Security Advisor, that didn't require that approval. Finally, and the last thing I want to mention in this section, I have also included a picture of Samantha Power, she's currently the American Ambassador to the United Nations. Prior to her work for Obama, that began while he was still a presidential candidate, Samantha Power was an academic that wrote a prominent book on genocide. Her beliefs about the inaction of Western powers to the atrocities of the 20th Century helped to influence the content of Obama's foreign policy. Particularly with respect to America's obligation relative to humanitarian crises. Powers is credited with playing a significant role in the decision to intervene with military force in Libya. Consequently, we will return to some of her ideas and stated positions as we discuss some of the ethical challenges facing U.S. foreign policy today. So, to recap, the Executive Branch plays a central role in making U.S. foreign policy and how it is organized is important. We usually think of the president as making foreign policy decisions. And this is correct. The president makes the final decision on these final matters of using military force and engaging in trade agreements, et cetera, et cetera. However, there is a whole structure behind the president that is involved in this decision-making process. I have went through three key agencies, the Departments of State, Defense, and the Treasury. They play central roles. So do agencies that are involved in the gathering of intelligence, meaning the gathering of information about what other countries are doing. Spying, right? The CIA and the Director of National Intelligence are the key agencies involved in that enterprise. When you hear about foreign policy actions and controversies, these are likely to be the political institutions involved. In addition to all these agencies, there are presidential advisors, most important is the National Security Council and its head, the National Security Advisor, who we just talked about. They also have great influence over what the president decides to do, from deciding how to react to Russian aggression in Ukraine to what to do about the threat of ISIS in Syria and Iraq. 