 Next, I want to continue this introductory discussion by talking about national interests. We should think about the national interest as a set of goals possessed by the United States. These interests guide policy, help to define the collective identity of what this thing called America is, and sets the scope of potential conflict or cooperation with other states in the international system. There are multiple sources of national interest. Sometimes they stem from concerns about national security, and sometimes they are driven by economic interests. We also need to recognize that even though we talk about the national interests of the United States, those interests themselves and how they might be prioritized are contested across American voters. Let's take each of these five attributes in a bit more detail. First, our national interest guide or underpin foreign policy. After 9/11, President Bush issued a new national security statement in 2002 that emphasized a vital American interest in preventing new acts of terrorism across the homeland. His administration decided that this meant trying to undermine the root causes of terrorism. Which they saw as political alienation and disenfranchisement in the Middle East. Officials believed toppling Saddam Hussein through war could remake the Middle East by pressuring other autocratic leaders to surrender to democratic rule. In this way, the policies to promote democracy and go to war in Iraq can be seen as designed to fulfill the broader political interest of preventing terrorist attacks at home. Second, these national interests emerge from and help to define the collective identity of Americans. What we think of as America has long been associated with individual freedom and democracy. In Bush's national security statement, you can see a desire to promote democracy. This national interest though, stems from a set of beliefs nested in a larger American political culture about the virtues of democracy more generally, and of the United States. Third, national interest and their degree of consistency with the national interests or goals of other states sets the potential for political conflict or cooperation with states. You can think about our allies as possessing some foundation of common interest with us. It might seem silly to suggest this, but why are we not continually at war with Canada? The answer is pretty straightforward, the United States and Canada possess similar political interests. Both support democracy, both support market based economies, and both agree that the territorial boundaries between them are appropriate and both have major league baseball teams. Alternatively, we can understand a lot about the tension between the United States and Iran by simply comparing how their national interests conflict. Iran sought nuclear weapons to help deter an invasion by its rivals in the region including Israel, the United States and Saudi Arabia. Even though the United States and Iran successfully negotiated an agreement to halt the Iranian nuclear weapons program in 2015, many Iranian leaders might want to resuscitate the nuclear weapons program at some point. Those same leaders would also probably like to see the state of Israel eliminated. These potential Iranian policy goals, though directly contradict America's interest with respect to the security of its important ally in the region, Israel. Fourth, we should also think about multiple sources or dimensions of American foreign policy interests. For example, there are security interests in which our security is at stake. You can think about security in terms of the ability of our government to protect and safeguard the physical safety of American citizens. Military threats to security can be prompted through aggression by rival state towards its neighbors. Think of Russia threatening Ukraine or Nazi Germany threatening its neighbors. Or it can take a form of a hostile transnational group using force as it did against the United States and other countries when Al Qaeda and ISIS launched attacks on 9/11 and subsequently in the 21st century. The United States also possesses economic interests that influence American foreign policy. The US has interest in maintaining a global free market system and free trade. We have concrete economic interest in countries that supply the US with raw materials and other products. The US wants to protect and further the interests of American businesses around the world. The US also has ideational interests. These are the values that we hold dear in part because they shape our national identity as Americans. We have interests in protecting human rights and furthering democracy. The final thing that we want to talk about with respect to national interest is to recognize national interests are often contested. Some groups may support free trade policies while other groups want more protection. Some groups might support a muscular foreign policy that relies heavily on military force while others support an isolationist foreign policy that sees little need for an army other than for defending the homeland. Given this potential for conflict within society over how the national interest should be defined, institutions like elections and the separation of power between the legislative and executive branches play an important role in settling national interests by determining which groups' interests went out in the policy making process. For example, the party that wins presidential elections possesses disproportionate leverage in choosing who will lead the foreign policy bureaucracy that is tasked with implementing American foreign policy. That party will be in a better political position to set the national interest of the United States. Or at least set which foreign policy interests get pursued by our government. 