 The first thing I want to point out is note when this thing was first written. It's in September of 2002 so this is a statement of American foreign policy interests and its grand strategy in the aftermath of 9/11. The document is really going to emphasize how different the world was that the United States was facing in September of 2002 say as opposed to September of 1980. Fighting the global war against terrorism was not going to be like fighting the Soviet Union. Deterrence against radical terrorists probably wouldn't work. There was a new threat to the United States in the form of transnational terrorists and the real, ultimate threat was the possibility that they could leverage technology, get their hands on weapons of mass destruction. Why is this a huge problem? Because they are more likely to use a nuclear weapon than the Soviets were. As a consequence, we can't deter terrorists in the same way we deterred the Soviet Union. This then changed the policy recommendations or the statements that the Bush administration said that it would be willing - or the policies that it was willing to undertake to fight Al' Qaeda in the war against terrorism. Note also that this document is written as part of the run-up to the Iraq war. By many accounts, the administration had already made its decision for war by the fall of 2002. Thus this is also a prepatory document and this also showed up on Piazza. We can see this in some of the comments. I was reading through them this morning. This is also about justifying the coming war against Iraq and you can see this in a couple of places, particularly in the defense of the doctrine of preemption and another way to think about this is the statement in the document that says the best defense is a good offense. And in the equation or in a sense granting equivalence to terrorists with the states that harbored them. So essentially what the document is saying. if you're harboring terrorists, you're fair game. We're going to attack you and we're going to attack you before you attack us or before the terrorists that you're harboring attack us. And so we can see in this document, a justification for the war against Afghanistan, a justification for the coming war against Iraq. And there's a clear warning to Iran and North Korea in here. Finally as I noted when I introduced this, I want to connect this reading with our upcoming module on grand strategy. When you think about grand strategy, think about the organizing set of ideas that animate an administration's vision for America's role in the world. What are its goals? What type of policies are we going to implement to pursue those goals. That's how you can read this document. This document is a statement of American grand strategy that's part of as what might be thought of as the Bush doctrine. But at the same time it also includes a number of elements where statement of interests, foreign policy actions, how we should revise the foreign policy bureaucracy that hit on many of the things that you learned about today in our pre-class modules. Alright so now I want to use the document to provide a number of examples just to illustrate some of the concepts that you did before class today. So first, note that this is a clear statement of American foreign policy interest. There's a lot of time spent on the promotion of human freedom, human rights and democracy. But this is first, I would argue, this is a statement about the government's responsibility to protect the homeland from external threats. To protect civilians from terrorists. That almost gets lost a little bit in there but it's clear I think if you want to create a hierarchy of goals, the first thing is security. We got to protect our civilians from attack by foreigners. And after that, a way to make our citizens more safe is to promote freedom around the world in the form of democracy, free trade, open-markets. Second, this is also a statement of the threat environment. And I already talked about this in the beginning here. This is a statement that the threat environment has changed. The world that the United States exists in in 2002 is very different from the Cold War. Deterrence won't work. As a consequence, the United States has to be more willing and more ready to use military force because we have radical terrorists, they are much more willing to launch nuclear weapons or weapons of mass destruction against the United States if they get their hands on them. So the United States has to aggressively take all steps necessary to prevent radical terrorists from getting their hands on weapons of mass destruction. This is also a statement of in broad outlines of some policies that the Bush administration is going to pursue in fulfillment of this broader set of goals. There is as I mentioned, there is a greater willingness to strike first. The doctrine of preemption and this is perhaps the most controversial component of this national security statement. Most people viewed this as a radical shift from a logic of deterrence that in a sense said we won't respond to the Soviets until they respond first. We have a threat and so this doctrine of preemption many including critical allies in Western Europe and other countries around the world said the United States is changing its forced posture, it's willing to go on the offense rather than sitting on the defense and the concern was, is the U.S. actually communicating more aggressive intentions to remake the world. So the rest of the world views this doctrine or this statement not only as a warning but also with some concern that the United States potentially is overreacting to 9/11 and it's defense of the status quo or its role in defending the status quo since at least 1945 might be evolving and so there were many countries around the world that viewed this document as more threatening than prior administrations. A couple other things in terms of statement of policies, there's a clear commitment to a massive counter terrorism operation here and there's a clear commitment to going after rouge states. Rogue states are different, they're more willing to use force, they don't care about their citizenry, they are threats to the United States. We're going to go after rogue states. >> Axis of evil. >> Yes, the axis of evil which was a prior speech. Michael Gerson I think wrote it and as in the aftermath said I don't know if I should have said that because it really created a mobilizing device for critics of the administration. There's support for fostering development and growth. You can see in here the beginnings of the need to try and get at some of the underlying causes of terrorism. Poverty's really bad for American interests because the conventional wisdom at that time was it was disenfranchisement, both politically and economically that was providing the fertile ground to recruit terrorists. Those ideas have changed somewhat but the argument here was this is going to be a long-run challenge that's going to need a long-run commitment. The United States needs to do more to foster economic growth and openness in developing countries. There's a criticism of traditional foreign aid programs in there. They're not working. We need to incentive economic reform with aid but also note here, there's a foreshadowing of the Bush's commitment or the Bush administration's commitment to fight AIDS with massive spending programs, antiviral drugs in Africa. There's a commitment to work with allies but there's also a statement we will go alone if necessary which then generates a lot of controversy with respect to Iraq. And finally the last component of that really emphasizes the importance of NATO or the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in American foreign policy. Note as well that the release of this document is also a foreign policy act in and of itself. President Bush is trying to alter the beliefs of foreign actors. This is about issuing a serious warning. Principally to Saddam Hussein but also to North Korea and Iran. If you harbor terrorists, we're coming to get you. Expect regime change which is what happens in the subsequent six or seven months and so what President Bush is - he's trying to influence the beliefs of other actors to try to send signals about the commitment of the United States to fight a long extended campaign in the war against terrorism and to potentially transform regions of instability around the world if necessary to protect American civilians. I forgot one more thing I wanted to note here that builds on the pre-class lecture modules that you watched for today. Notice there's also a discussion about reforming the foreign policy bureaucracy in this document. We need better intelligence, we need to coordinate intelligence gathering. We're going to create a department of homeland security and we're going to enhance the resources that are going to the defense department. So in many ways this is a broad statement that the United States is going to be in a long campaign. We're going to commit a lot of resources to fighting that campaign and we're going to fight it on different terms. We're changing our grand strategy orientation from the way it was during the Cold War. 