 ﻿1 In this group of lecture segments, we are shifting from introductory material to identifying key components of the foreign policy making process in the United States. Module five examines the President in foreign policy decision making. Module six examines the role of Congress in U.S. foreign policy, and module seven discusses the role of the broader public, namely non-governmental actors in the making of U.S. foreign policy. This topic contains seven lecture segments. In the first, I discuss the constitutional foundations of Presidential leadership in foreign policy. Second segment discusses the bureaucratic politics of foreign policy making from within the executive branch. It identifies three sets of political constraints, often associated with inter-agency competition among multiple bureaucratic agencies that influence U.S. foreign policy. We will see that the possession of responsibility for implementing policy decisions made by the President can give appointed officials, say at the state department or the defense department, important influence over the content of these foreign policy decisions in the first place. The third segment provides an insiders look at foreign policy making within the executive branch. It is comprised of part of an interview with the Director of the CIA, John Brennan, conducted in the fall of 2015. The fourth segment discusses a recent academic debate over the role played by war in military conflict in the relative balance of political power between the President and Congress. It asks, does war expand presidential authority in power? You can think about this question in the context of larger debates about the long term domestic political consequences of 9/11, and you should also think about this question in terms of the overarching questions that we presented as guiding the content of this course. Remember, we made the claim in a set of introductory segments that forces associated with globalization and war have shaped American institutions, and the collective identity of Americans. The discussion in this segment here provides sound moral support for that claim. The fifth segment returns to the interview with Director Brennan, to examine some of the consequences of 9/11 on foreign policy making in the United States. The sixth segment discusses the reading by Golan-Vilella that was assigned for this module. The reading examines the murky constitutional situation created by congressional authorizations for war against Al Qaeda in 2001, and against Iraq in 2002. President Obama argues that the AUMF, or Authorization to Use Military Force, of 2001, still grants him the authority to fight the current war against ISIS. Many experts inside and outside of the government disagree with this claim, however, congress as a whole remains unwilling to do something about this, in the form of imposing any limits on the President to continue this war, despite their potential constitutional obligation to do so. The seventh segment examines the role of executive actions in foreign policy, by discussing some of President Obama's efforts to grant some form of legal status to a portion of illegal immigrants in the United States. 