 The Constitutional basis for presidential authority over war and armed conflict, as well as foreign policy more generally can be found in several clauses in Article II of the Constitution. The most famous one is Article II, Section 2, and it's on the slide there. The president shall be Commander in chief of the Army, Navy, the, the armed forces. It is this clause that presidents, especially since World War II and the ascendance of the United States as a superpower, have used to legitimate their use of force around the world without a Congressional declaration of war. As Commander in Chief, most Presidents perceive their office as having few, if any constraints from other branches of government, to conduct and even initiate armed conflict. There are however, a couple other clauses that also provide a basis for Presidential authority in foreign policy. The Constitution explicitly gives the President the power to make treaties with the advice and consent of the Senate, and, to a point, ambassadors. More broadly, Article II, Section 1 gives the President broad executive powers, which most Presidents have claimed to include predominance over foreign policy. Indeed, many argued this was precisely what the founders writing the Constitution intended. And one can find numerous pieces of evidence in support of this very expansive idea of the President being the leader in terms of foreign policy. And I quote a memo here from Thomas Jefferson to George Washington in 1790, shortly after the ratification of the Constitution, in which Jefferson clearly argues that the President should have any powers not explicitly given to another branch of the Constitution, another branch in the Constitution. So with the Commander in Chief and the executive clauses of the Constitution, it seems like there's a strong case for expansive Presidential power over foreign policy. So the question is, you know, what is the problem? Why doesn't the President simply run foreign policy on his own? Well, in order to understand the institutional conflict between the executive and legislative branch over foreign policy, one has to take a step back and understand the general nature of the political system. And, the general major, here, that I want to emphasize is the intentional, and let me emphasize this, the intentional, system of separation of powers in checks and balances, that purposely divides powers between the Executive and Legislative branches, in order to check the concentration of power in any one branch. In the realm of foreign policy, we see the separation of powers in checks and balances, explicitly designed to curtail overconcentration of power over foreign policy in the President's hands. And you see this in several clauses. Of course you see it explicitly in one requirement that the President have not just a majority of support, but a two thirds majority support within the Senate for any treaty that he or she makes. But in addition to this, and we'll talk about this more when we talk about Congress in the next lecture, Congress is given two specific powers in the Constitution. In Article I, Section 8, the power to declare war and the power to create and support, that is to fund an army. Now there, we need to note that the Congress hasn't officially declared a war since World War II. But the United States has clearly fought a number of wars since then. So there is some, some debate about how relevant that declaration of war power is. But the power of the purse is real and the declaration of war power has legacy effects as well. The point here that I want to make is that by explicitly giving Congress certain powers in US foreign policy, the framers were trying to replicate a situation that they established in domestic policy. Where branches are intentionally set against each other with rival powers, to check against concentration of power. This separation of power system has implications that go far beyond the specific powers over foreign policy. First, please realize the basic difference between parliamentary and Presidential powers. The United States is a presidential system that has separation of powers, and they are distinct from parliamentary systems that have a fusion of executive and legislative power within the executive, which is usually called a prime minister. The prime minister in a parliamentary system is the leader of the majority party that wins in the legislative election. Or if there's not a majority party, the leader of the majority coalition of parties. In a separation of power system and presidential systems like the United States, there are separate elections, for the chief executive and for the legislature. These separate elections mean a couple of crucial things. First, separate elections mean separate constituencies. Presidents have a national constituency, whereas members of Congress have a more narrow constituency around a specific locale. Pat will talk more about in-depth about this difference in constituencies later in the lecture. The other crucial difference besides this, the nature of constituencies is that both the Executive Branch and the Legislative Branch have fixed terms. The President has a fixed term in office of four years, Senators have a fixed term of six years, House members have a fixed term of two years. The only thing that would disrupt that would be impeachment of the President, right? This makes a crucial difference from parliamentary systems. Prime ministers only retain their position as chief executive, as prime minister, if they maintain majority support within the parliament. If the majority party rebels, or more often if a majority coalition of parties split apart, then the lay, the legislature can call a vote of no confidence and effectively remove the prime minister, and there would be new elections. Now think about this crucial difference in the context of the United States and its polarized politics since the end of the Cold War. Imagine a vote of no confidence in Prime Minister George W. Bush over the Iraq War. Before the surge and, and some greater popular support for him, or a vote of no confidence in President Barack Obama in the current atmosphere in which in the add in the wake of mid-terms, we would see a rise in popular support for the Republican party. And so that would completely change the politics surrounding foreign policy in the United States. And so, the Constitutional structure makes a difference. 