 Talk a little bit about bureaucratic politics here. And so Rob has talked about how the separation of powers between the executive and the legislative branch that is designated in the Constitution might shape how foreign policy gets made in the United States. Now we're gonna talk about how politics within the executive branch, or competition among bureaucratic agencies that President Obama is tasked with managing, how this bureaucratic competition might influence foreign policy. This focus on the executive branch also allows us to discuss how foreign policies are implemented. Because that is a key function of the executive branch, to implement the foreign policy decisions reached through negotiations between Congress and the President. This implementation process, in part because it can spark some organizational rivalries within the Executive branch, can feed back into the policy making process. This means that decisions about how to implement policy, whether you're gonna delegate that responsibility to, say, the Defense Department or the State Department can have very real consequences for the shape of the policy itself. And I'm gonna give you some examples of that. I wanna talk about three aspects associated with what we're gonna refer to as bureaucratic politics associated with foreign policy. The first focuses on the management responsibilities of the President and the National Security Council staff over the entire foreign policy bureaucracy. The National Security Council includes the President, his National Security Advisor, the Vice President, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Defense, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staffs, and the Director of National Intelligence. And the heads of other agencies if the policies examined or debated bear on their organizational responsibilities. This National Security Council all, also has a sizeable support staff. This office within the White House was created under the Truman Administration to help to coordinate the rapidly expanding national security bureaucracy that was being constructed to wage the Cold War. So the President and his National Security Council play the central coordinating role among all the foreign policy agencies of the Executive Branch. Remember from the first day in class we talked a little bit about problems of coord, coordination. The problems of coordination revolve largely around preventing people or groups from getting in each other's way, so that they can complete their task, tasks. In this situation, the groups who are talking about coordination, the groups don't necessarily have conflicting policy goals, they might agree. Instead what happens though, they just need to take turns in how they go about their day to protect against bad outcomes. They need to coordinate their behavior, there needs to be some team building exercises. Think here again about the rule that we drive on the right hand side of the road, and that makes it easier for everyone on the highways to reach their destination safely. In foreign policy you might think of this coordination role as ensuring that bureaucratic, bureaucratic agencies communicate with each other, share information and do not work at cross purposes with each other. When this coordination breaks down there can be some significant negative consequences for American foreign policy. Let me give you one example here. This, and this example is taken from the run up to the first Persian Gulf war. I should say the run up to Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait in the summer of 1919, 1990. Saddam Hussein was given very different messages in that summer about how the United States might respond to a potential invasion of Kuwait from different members of the American Foreign Policy bureaucracy. So in July, the Secretary of Defense who, at that time was Dick Cheney, reaffirmed an American commitment made during the Iran-Iraq War to defend Kuwait. Later that day his spokesman, Pete Williams, who's now at NBC, backed away from that commitment publicly, blaming a journalist for quoting Cheney too liberally. A few days later Williams declined to answer a question about whether or not the United States would defend Kuwait. The same day, the State Department instructed the American ambassador to Iraq to reaffirm the American commitment to preserve the territorial integrity of American, America's friends in the Gulf, which implied Kuwait. So now we've got the Defense Department and the State Department saying different things about America's alliance commitment to Kuwait. So later this same day a State Department spokesman, Margaret Tutwiler, creates the opposite impression by saying that the United States did not have any defense treaties or security commitments to Kuwait. So within a few hours Saddam Hussein is confused, and he requests a meeting with the American ambassador. Who then told him we have no opinion on Arab, Arab conflicts like your border disagreement with Kuwait. These little anecdotes show that the State Department and the Defense Department were sending very different signals to Saddam Hussein about how the US would respond if he invaded Iraq. They failed to coordinate American communications and diplomacy with Iraq, which led Saddam to mistakenly believe that the US would stand aside if he invaded Kuwait. In this way, this coordination failure within the American government contributed to the outbreak of the first Persian Gulf War. From where, I'll just keep going, if that's okay. >> Okay, yeah. >> you, you, you got, you used a lot of time. >> Yeah, I'm tired, man. >> So we'll give you a break. >> Get to work, man. >> Take a nap if you want to. >> Come on! >> The second thing we wanna talk about with respect to bureaucratic politics within the executive branch occurs when different agency heads possess different foreign policy goals or different ideas about how to respond to a threat. This can activate intense political conflict among these agency heads in which they compete for influence with the President. It then comes down to the President to adjudicate among these contending groups and pick the winners and the lo, and the losers. This competition sometimes elevates the National Security Advisor in managing this process. For examp, example, some people argued that Condoleezza Rice emerges as the king maker, or the swing vote, in intense debates among the principles when key decisions were made about the decision to go to war in Iraq in 2003 and then in subsequent decisions about how to manage the stabilization efforts. The larger point here is that how the President and the National Security Advisor structure this competition among bureaucratic agencies, can shape foreign policy outcomes. For example, who gets invited to the meetings and who gets left off the list can matter. If you're not in the room, it's much harder to influence the decision. So let me give you one example from the second Persian Gulf War that illustrates this competition can have real consequences for policy. There was obviously intense conflict among Colin Powell, Dick Cheney, and Donald Rumsfeld over the decision to go to war and then the subsequent decisions about how to manage stabilization efforts there. Powell had pushed hard for securing UN approval for the war and when those diplomatic efforts failed, he lost significant ground in the larger bureaucratic battle among key players in the foreign policy bureaucracy. One of the casualties of Powell's waning influence was over bureaucratic responsibility for managing the post invasion stabilization operations in Iraq. The State Department had been planning for this and had set up an agency to manage this process. However, Powell chose, lost out in the broader decision and these post stabilization operations were delegated to the Defense Department. Because security was, and one of the arguments was, because security would be so central to reconstructure, and the military would be responsible for providing that security, then the Defense Department should be tasked with this. The consequence of this though, and the bureaucratic struggle was, all of the work that had been done in the State Department that was preparing for this transfer of power was essentially lost and officials in the Defense Department largely ignored it. Why was this important? Because key players in the Defense Department, were true believers in such neo-conservative principles like the desire of everyone for freedom and democracy. Their ideological predispositions led them to believe that the transfer of power in Iraq would be relatively smooth and the establishment of self government fairly easy. These beliefs then led them to under-invest in basic security sys, services like extra police officers, which then contributed to the post war chaos in Iraq. Immediately after the defeat of Saddam's army in 2003 and then fuels much broader intense resentment about the American invasion there. Even though it had displaced the highly unpopular Saddam Hussein. In short, the delegation of this responsibility for post conflict stabilization in Iraq, this delegation to the Defense Department had serious long term consequences to the war effort in Iraq and arguably contributed to the need for a surge later on. So now I want to identify a third element of bureaucratic politics, and this occurs when bureaucratic interesst are not only driven by their assessment of what the best policy might be to meet the national interests of the United States. But bureaucratic interests are also shaped by their assessment of which policy might maximize the influence, or resources, of that specific bureaucratic agency within the executive branch. So, in this situation, these organizational interests can influence foreign policy choices. A common manifestation of these dynamics occurs when bureaucratic agencies try to au, to spend all their resources at the end of a fiscal year. They do this because it then creates justification to get more resources, say, that might be targeted to other bureaucratic agencies in the following years. So, internal organizational politics, the desire by, say, officials in the Defense Department to have more say or more influence over foreign policy than the State Department can shape foreign policy outcomes. So let me illustrate this with a final example from the early stages of the Cold War. In the decade after World War II, officials within the executive branch had an extended debate about how to respond to or contain the Soviet threat. A big question centered on how dependent the US should be on air power and threats to launch nuclear strikes on Soviet city, cities, to protect western Europe, to deter the Soviets from invading western Europe. The Air Force argues for increasing American dependence on air power, instead of putting lots of ground troops in western Europe. In part because it would have shifted massive resources towards the Air Force, and away from the Army. So here we can see how an interservice rivalry influences much larger debates about grand strategy and foreign policy, and how the US should prosecute the Cold War. The Air Force favored air power, in part because it would strengthen their claim to resources, and make them a more powerful bureaucracy within the American government. 