 Now we want to talk about how war changes presidential authority. You might think of this in terms of how war influences the balance of political power between the president and Congress or in terms of the balance of power between the federal government and the people. Remember back on the first day of class, we said we want to think about how the larger international system shapes the United States. Both its institutions and its identity. 9/11 and the subsequent wars it provoked have been a powerful force in remaking American politics. In this section of the lecture, we want to examine some of the potential mechanisms by which this might occur. Specifically, we're going to do this by talking briefly about how war influences or increases presidential authority relative to other branches of government and relative to society at large. There's a conventional wisdom which holds that war enables an executive to expand his institutional authority at home. In the United States this might mean limiting Congressional powers to influence the execution of the war or the next war. Or it might mean that the president gets to enact policies that are closer to his own policy goals so that he's forced to make fewer concessions to Congress. Recent research even finds that this expansion of presidential influence expands beyond just the execution of the war itself. In long wars, particularly World War One and the wars that follow 9/11, Presidents can even get more of what they want on the home front in domestic policies during war. This conventional wisdom presents an important puzzle. So as Rob noted an earlier segment, the Constitution explicitly grants Congress the power to declare war, to raise an army, to regulate commerce. Why then does Congress seed such powers in war? Potentially limiting its capacity in the long run to check presidential authority on key issues associated with national security. A group of scholars provide an interesting answer to this question that I think helps us understand some of the responses associated with 9/11. This theory starts with an important observation, or reality that will also have a bearing on material in this class and the next. The president and members of Congress represent different constituencies. The president represents a much larger constituency than any individual member of Congress. This national constituency is important because it is much less likely to have a skewed ideological composition than smaller constituencies. Think of this in terms of relatively small red states like Wyoming, the Dakotas, or Nebraska. You are more likely to represent a constituency that is tilted in the aggregate further to the political right or to the political left if that constituency is smaller or comprised by fewer citizens in the United States. So think about it this way. It's easier to find 5 or 10 people that agree on something than it is to find ten thousand people that agree. This is the same principle when we're comparing the size of the national constituency that the president represents relative to a smaller statewide constituency. Let's say a representative from North Dakota is responsible to. Now the second key component of their theory is that members of Congress have both national and local or district interests. This stems from the reality that the costs and benefits of national policies can be distributed unevenly across the country, unevenly across congressional districts, and unevenly across states. So let me provide an example here to make this more concrete. So after the Soviet Union collapsed, there was a lot of pressure inside the United States for something called the Peace Dividend. And the idea was that because the Soviets were no longer a threat, many of the resources that had been spent on defense during the Cold War could be reallocated to society in the form of tax cuts, or new spending initiatives at home. In short, the end of the cold war created a national interest in saving national resources on defense. What happens though if you have a big military base in your district? Say Fort Hood? And that base is slated for closing as part of this reallocation of national resources. This means that a lot of people in your district are going to be out of work and you might not get reelected. In this circumstance, local and national interests for that congressional official representing that military base, might conflict. Given that their district elects them, they might vote to continue defense appropriations from the cold war. In this circumstance then we might see real conflict between Congress and the President on defense appropriations. How does war change this? War changes the relative importance of local and national goals in the political calculations of congressional officials. They care more about national policy outcomes during periods of intense national security crisis. As a consequence, they tend to move closer to the presidents policy positions during those crises and then cast votes that support his policies. Now there's another element to the story though. The president has better access to a huge foreign policy bureaucracy that can gather enough information to identify optimal policy responses to some foreign challenge. You can think about this in terms of better access to intelligence and about the long run organizational viability of ISIS. So knowing that the president might be better informed about what is the best national policy response in a crisis say, to ISIS. Congressional officials are also worried that they might be wrong because they don't have access to the same amount of information to make such a difficult policy choice. This uncertainty or what is exactly the right national security policy to adopt can also lead congressional officials to give the president more of what he wants during these periods of national crisis. Okay so how does all of this manifest in the aftermath of 9/11? We can think about a very broad open-ended authorization of the war against terror and then against Iraq that Congress issued in 2001 as an example of these dynamics. President Obama still relied on these acts of Congress to prosecute the war against ISIS well into his second term. Similarly, you might think of the growth of signals intelligence and the patriot act as additional dynamics of how war can strengthen the power of the executive branch, both relative to Congress and to the people. To society at large. Remember, war gives the president more political power at home because it forces members of Congress to care more about national issues and because it exposes them to their relative lack of information or intelligence that is often necessary to make crucial national security decisions. As a consequence, during crisis, congressional officials often delegate more responsibility to the president in part because they don't want to assume more political risk for being wrong in confronting these national security challenges. 