 The first question that we wanted to give students some sense of is just your daily responsibilities at the CIA. And so there's a lot of general questions about what's the CIA's role in the broader making of American foreign policy. So can you just give us some sense of what your three most important daily responsibilities are? >> Well, first of all, thanks for the invitation to be here today. It's great to be back in Longhorn Country and it's particularly great to be back as part of the Government Department's engagement with the student body as a former Government department student. It's very invigorating to come back here as Director of CIA. I never in my wildest dreams thought I would be here in this capacity today. As Director of CIA I guess if I were to group my responsibilities into three buckets, one is make sure CIA is doing everything possible around the globe to uncover those threats and to stop whether it be attacks, or some type of aggression against U.S. interest and keeping this country strong and safe. We have agency officers who are serving all around the globe in some very dangerous places as well as just working at embassies and making sure that we're able to have our eyes and ears attuned to all those threats. So this responsibility that we have, I need to make sure that our agency and our headquarters is providing the support to all the agents in the field who are doing this. Secondly, as mentioned, with the release of the Presidential Daily Briefs that we'll be doing later on today, one of our most important responsibilities is make sure the President and the senior policy makers in the government receive the best insights, best intelligence available on all of these developments worldwide. And the PDB, for 50 years, has been the vehicle that the President, the Vice President and others have been receiving not just CIA's insights but also the insights, the intelligence, the assessments of the rest of the intelligence community. And that's a very very important responsibility. And so we, as CIA, need to make sure that we are doing everything on a daily basis to keep the President informed not just through the PDB but also on breaking development throughout the day. So frequently I'm on the phone with Susan Rice a national security adviser down at the White House, at principles meetings, national security council meetings, so we have that constant engagement to make sure that they have the best understanding possible about these many situations. And third, I also serve as the CEO of a multi-billion, many thousand employee organization, and we are right now going through a bit of a modernization effort, as well call it, and transformation to make sure that we're able to deal with the challenges that lie ahead of us. And the intelligence business has evolved over the years and is certainly much different than when I joined the agency first in 1980. Not just because the world's challenges have evolved and are different, but also because of the great advances in technology which can be certainly a great enabler of society, but also poses some serious challenges in terms of the types of improvised explosive devices that terrorist organizations might try to develop as well as the digital domain and what it means as far as our operations and activities. So my CEO responsibilities I take very seriously and I want to make sure that our work force is able to fulfill the responsibilties, again, keeping America safe, and also making sure that policy makers have the best intelligence available. >> So can you talk a little bit more about the PDB. We had a number of questions, lets see, from Carolina, Patrick, and Margarite asking about the differences across Presidents. Can you give us some sense of differences across Presidents and how they receive the Daily Brief, and how your responsibilities change or have to be adjusted to Presidential differences? >> Well it certainly has evolved over the years in terms of how the PDB has delivered to the President. There were times that it was delivered not by any CIA officer, but it was sent down to the White House. A national security adviser would then use it to debrief the President. Some Presidents have wanted to have the CIA officer actually in the oval office as they read the PDB. I was the PDB briefer for President Clinton, so I had regular interaction with the President, as he had questions about the various articles that were in there. And since President Bush came in to office, President Bush, and now President Obama, have asked for either the Director of CIA or the Director of National Intelligence to be a part of that oval office discussion. It's become much more interactive because they want to be able to respond and ask questions about the pieces in the book. Currently, President Obama receives the PDB on a computer tablet, an iPad and he receives it early in the morning and so after he exercises, he will have read that PDB before the oval office session takes place. Because he has already digested that as well as other sources of information. The way that our responsibilities have changed over the course of different presidencies really relates to how the world's challenges have evolved. For example President Bush, shortly after he came into office was struck with the attacks of 9/11. And so we had to respond to that in a global way by sending CIA officers as well as troops to Afghanistan, then there was the Iraq war. With President Obama, what we have seen in the Middle East with the iris spring, the civil conflict, and a lot of political turbulence throughout the region and so what's in PDB and what's in the book really will reflect some of the pressing issues of the day and what the administration needs in order to carry out its policy decisions as well as, as appropriate, to ask the CIA to engage in covert action in order to advance our policy objectives. >> So a number of the questions I wanted to try and get at, do partisan differences matter with respect to presidents? Does this shape how you present intelligence? Does it matter whether you have a democrat or republican in the White House? >> What my personal experience has been, and the first time I went to the oval office was back in 1990, it was shortly after Saddam Hussain invaded Quwait and President H. W. Bush, 41, wanted to have people who had some experience at least in terms of looking at what the implications are of that invasion. And then I had opportunities after that to meet with President Clinton as his briefer as well as President Bush on numerous occasions as well as President Obama, and what I've found in each one of those instances that when a person is elected President they really do put their partisan biases behind them. Yes, they continue to support their party whether it be Republican or Democrat and they will go out and campaign for them. But when it comes to national security issues I have never witnessed, in any of these oval office sessions, any president who looks at something and says 'boy, this really is not consistent with what our democratic principles are,' or republican principles or objectives or goals. I really believe that the President, once the individual is elevated to the office of the Presidency they recognize that there is a real solemn obligation to do what they need to do in order to advance our national security interest. I wish that was the case, quite frankly, with a lot of the legislators who are elected and are in Congress, and both in the Senate and the House, in terms of, putting those partisan agendas behind them and I must say that in the corridors of Washington and Congress, the partisanship is something that has overtime, I think, really undermined our ability to carry out very important national security programs and objectives. >> Well let's ask you a bit about Congress and congressional oversight here. What do you think is the role of congressional oversight in intelligence and does it facilitate your work? Does it hamper your work? A little bit of both? >> Yes, sometimes I am critical of what I see as the shortcomings of the congressional oversight process, just the way they are critical of what they see as the shortcomings of the agency. But at the same time I believe very very strongly about the importance, the imperitave of congressional oversight. It is vitally important that the elected representatives of this country, in the Senate and the House have the ability to know what we're doing, be able to review the types of activities that we're involved in because they also have responsibility for appropriating funds to us, and they shouldn't be appropriating funds to us for things that are inconsistent with what their legislative objectives are as far as the laws, and what they rightly see as their responsibility to help guide and shape the capabilities of the intelligence community. So I do believe fervently in it. I sent a notice out to the work force, I think it was just last week, where I really emphasized the importance of their engagement with the congress. I have found it to be one of the most enlightening and professionally enriching experiences I've had. >> You love those guys. [laughter] >> I've been through the nomination process and nomination hearings, and, as my father tells me, it's character building and it certainly is. That doesn't mean that we don't have areas of disagreement and when I hear things from my congressional overseers that I disagree with I will let them know, and I think they acknowledge that I am somebody who is not soft spoken in that regard. >> So, we also covered the politics, the bureaucratic politics within the executive branch in our class. And sometimes the coordination issues, but also the conflicts between agencies like the CIA and the Departments of State and defense. And so I was hoping you could shed some light on how those relationships are born out in say current events that have happened like the Iran nuclear deal, or the problem with ISIS in the Middle East or something like that. >> Yeah, and I would encourage students to really take some time to learn about the policy making process in Washington because it is complicated and it is something that, when I was a government student, I didn't have really a clue about how it worked. The inter-agency process, which you frequently hear about the national security council meetings that the President presides over where a lot very weighty and important decisions are made, but that's the culmination of an inter-agency process that starts at a lower level, the level of an assistant secretary or an assistant director of the CIA. This is called an inter-agency policy committee, an IPC. It is there where these policy issues are looked at, debated, options are explored, the intelligence is provided to the various members of that committee. Then it is elevated to the Deputies Committee, my deputy David Cohen is the CIA's representative at the Deputies Committee Tony Blinken is the deputy for Secretary of State, he represents the state, and they continue to refine and explore options and look at what the advantages and disadvantages are in certain policy courses. Then it's elevated to a Principles Committee, where the heads of the agencies and departments, the secretaries, Kerry and Carter and Lou and others and myself and Jim Clapper the Director of National Intelligence, we're there, and we're then reviewing the work of the various inter-agency committees and we are making recommendations to the President about which way to go forward and sometimes the process works lethargically, depending on the issue sometimes it has to operate almost at the speed of light so you'll have an IPC, a DC, a PC, an NSC in the course of 24 hours because there's a breaking issue. And I think those discussions that take place in the White House situation room are really quite rich with the debate, the discussion. Intelligence, our role is to make sure that the policy makers have a good sense of what we know from intelligence sources, what we don't know, what we believe are the implications and potential consequences and costs and benefits of different policy courses. And then it really is up to the policy makers to reach a consensus or have a division of views. And frequently when things are teed up to the President for National Secutiry Council meetings he will get a memo, because when I was at the White House I used to have to prepare all the memos, outlining the positions of the various departments of the NSC. And because the president is somebody, and that certainly has been true in previous presidencies as well, they want to illicit differences of view, they want to illicit their ideas and thoughts on this and then it is up to the President who has the Lincoln votes to make the decison about which way to go forward. But it is a very rich, it's an iterative process, and is one that I think has generally served the nation well, however I will say that with the pace of events these days and so many issues, we tend to tag from one issue to the other and so we'll have numerous PCs and NSCs and DCs in a matter of a few days. That's why that lower level work that is being done at the IPC and DCs level are so important. 