 Alright. So now we want to stay on the topic of the ongoing war in Syria and Iraq. We're going to shift from how it influences election politics to questions about the appropriate balance between the executive and legislative branches when conducting US foreign policy. And questions about the legal foundation for the Obama Administration's current use of military force against ISIS. So we're going to talk about this Vilella reading and at base, this article reviews the continuing legal validity of two acts of Congress that provided that legal foundations for the wars against the Taliban in Afghanistan and in Iraq, both of which began after 9/11. So in September of 2001, Congress authorized the president to use military force against all of the organizations that had participated in or supported the attacks on 9/11. This act has been cited as authorizing strikes against Al-Qaeda in Afghanistan and around the world. Some, including Golan-Vilella, worry that it has been used to expand the war against terrorism indefinitely, beyond what was originally envisioned in 2001. Now similarly, Congress authorized the use of military force against Iraq in October of 2002. This law, like the 2001 AUMF, is still in effect. However, the president declared the war against Iraq as over in 2011 and does not cite it as continuing to -- or... I'm sorry -- does not cite it as justifying current military action in Iraq. However, President Obama has argued that the 2001 AUMF authorized his use of military force against ISIS that began in 2014. He argues that ISIS is a successor organization to Al-Qaeda in Iraq. Consequently, his authority to fight ISIS can be traced back to that act of Congress in 2001. Now this article was published before Obama made this legal claim publicly in the fall of 2014. However, its critiques of these existing AUMFs still have important implications for the current legal state of the American war against ISIS. This is why we wanted you to read it. So now I just want to highlight a couple of things from this piece. First, Golan-Vilella argues that the 2002 AUMF should be repealed. The President declared the war over in 2011 so the law and its authorization are no longer relevant. Second, he makes a broad argument that both Congress and the administration should revisit the 2001 AUMF. The claim here is that the law as it stands now, is too vague and risks granting the executive branch too much independence indefinitely or too much authority indefinitely in waging a war against enemies that have yet to be defined or legally can be defined in secret. Thus he's essentially arguing that the continued reliance of the President on the 2001 AUMF is undermining the democratic process in the United States. The President does not have to name the targets of military attacks. Moreover Congress is essentially seating its legislative and Constitutional responsibilities here to constrain and check the executive power of the President. So in effect, he is blaming all parties here. Both the legislative branch and the executive branch. One other thing to note here that's helpful. He argues that the very act of discussing the need to get a new AUMF or authorization to use military force to fight ISIS can generate political constraints on the president separate from any legal constraints that Congress agrees to do. Now, so why is Congress so reluctant to do anything here? There's been conversations about authorizing the President to fight ISIS for at least the last 18 months. Why so reluctant? You want to take this? >> Well yeah. So let me just back track a little bit. One of the issues around an AUMF just to sort of connect it to the pre-class module is this - is the fact that the Congress has simply for decades now, not declared war, right? And so this is a way that the President as Commander in Chief gets some congressional buy in for military interventions and it is related to the war powers act as well that requires that the president get some sort of congressional authorization after a certain period of time with any military intervention and so that's the general context that we're working from here. And the big question here is that the AUMF provides a lot of political challenges for both actors and we're going to be talking a bit about this again in the next lecture as well when we look at the congressional side of the role in foreign policy. And that is that the Congress has sort of attention here. Congress as an institution wants to have a role. Wants to play some sort of check on Presidential power. That's the way that the political system is set up through the constitution. But also has a certain reluctance because they don't know how these conflicts are going to turn out and so a congressional vote can be a nightmare for individual members of Congress after the fact and so you see this in the Presidential contests now. There were Presidential votes in 2002, in 2001, about authorizing military force and the Presidential contestants now who voted in favor of that, like Hilary Clinton is haunted by it because those who on the further left within the Democratic party can always say, you supported a very unpopular, very unsuccessful war and I didn't. Barack Obama said that, Bernie Sanders is saying that now. And so why is Congress reluctant to do so? I'd say it's mostly around these individual interests. I mean there's other things as well. Yeah well and so we have really what now is an uneasy equilibrium. The President wants to wage the war against ISIS. Lots of Congress wants him to wage the war against ISIS. But at the same time, Congress is unsure what's going to happen and so they'd rather, many of them complain about this, criticize the president while at the same time not taking a vote that then could haunt them in the next elections and so you have a situation where - so Constitutionally in Democratic process, it's not a good situation. Congress has a responsibility here to either empower the President to wage the war or to constrain his ability to wage the war. At the same time, there are individual political incentives associated with the next election that lead them to complain about it in the press, say Obama's doing a bad job of fighting against ISIS but at the same time avoiding responsibility for casting a vote on this issue. And so from a democratic and you can see this in the article here, from a democratic process standpoint the inaction of Congress either in terms of giving thumbs up or thumbs down on is frustrating. And we're going to show a video in the next class that talks about Obama's decision or lack of a decision not to target Syria in 2014 and links it specifically to wanting to force Congress to be greater stake holders in this conflict. >> Exactly. One of the things that this also touches on is the particular nature of fighting wars with non-state actors and that is that these kinds of battles are going to be very long-term. Don't have a concrete end. You can't win these wars very easily and see a finite end and so one of the problems is as this article lays out, yeah we had authorization to fight Al' Qaeda. Al' Qaeda kind of morphed into ISIS but Al' Qaeda's still around but we're not really fighting Al' Qaeda and so there's a certain logical inconsistency to using an AUMF to fight Al' Qaeda against ISIS who declares itself not Al' Qaeda and Al' Qaeda disavows itself from ISIS as being too radical. I mean it just doesn't make any logical sense. You should do it over again and reboot this authorization from Congress but Congress just doesn't want to do it. 