 Now we want to talk about another way that presidents affect foreign policy -- executive orders. Ideally the president will work with Congress to pass legislation to pursue policies that are agreeable to both the president and Congress. However the president can also enact policy on his or her own -- primarily through executive orders. So what is an executive order? Executive order is an official order from the president that has the force of law but not it's permanence. Issuing an executive order bypasses Congress. Congress cannot vote against an executive order but it can pass laws that undo them. However the president can then veto these laws, which allows presidents a way to protect their executive orders. As another check on executive power, the Supreme Court can overturn executive orders but only if they are deemed unconstitutional. Most importantly future presidents can undo the executive orders of their predecessors by simply issuing executive orders of their own. This is the primary risk of the executive order. President Obama has relied on executive orders to enact some of his policies that he cannot get through the Republican controlled Congress. Some noteworthy Obama executive orders include the Iran nuclear deal, immigration, and gun control. We will take a closer look at his 2014 immigration executive order to get at the politics of this presidential power in foreign policy. Before we get into this issue though we want to run a pretty funny clip from 2014, right after President Obama announced one of his most controversial executive orders on immigration. Saturday Night Live did a satirical take on this executive order with a spoof on the popular School House Rock song, 'I'm Just A Bill.' Let's go ahead and run that clip. >> ♪ We now return to a brand new episode of School House Rock. ♪♪♪ >> Boy, you really have to climb a lot of steps to get to this Capitol building in Washington D.C. Say, what's that piece of paper doing here? >> Oh you mean me? I tell you who I am. ♪ I'm just a bill, yes I'm only a bill. And I'm sitting here on Capitol Hill. ♪ But I know I'll be a law someday At least I hope and pray that I will, ♪ But today I am still just a bill. ♪ >> Cool, what kind of bill are ya? >> Why I'm an immigration bill, and one day the Republicans might create me, so I could become a law. >> And how does a bill become a law? >> Funny you should ask. ♪ Well first I go to the House and they vote on me ♪ but then I need from the Senate a majority ♪ and if I pass the legislative test then I wind on the President's desk and I -- ow! [thump] ♪ Ow! My sweet [inaudible] Ah my legs! They were made of paper! >> President Obama what's the big idea? That bill was trying to become a law. >> I realize that, but you know son, there's actually an even easier way to get things done around here. It's called an executive order. >> ♪ I'm an executive order, and I pretty much just happen. ♪ [laughter] And that's it! >> Wait a second, don't you have to go through Congress at some point. >> Aw that's adorable, you still think that's how government works. [laughs] >> Don't listen to him son. ♪ Look at the midterm elections, people clearly don't want this -- ah! [thumps] Ow! Oh god! Oh wow! Why did I come back? Ahh! I think I landed on my keys! >> Mr. President is this constitutional? >> Of course, presidents issue executive orders all the time. >> That's right, I could do lots of things. ♪ I'll create a national park or a new holiday, >> ♪ or grant legal status to five million undocumented immigrants -- >> Wait what?! >> Yup that's what you're going to do. >> Oh my god, well I didn't have time to read myself.. Woah! Okay go big or go home huh? >> [heavy breaths] This isn't over! ♪ We're going to take you to court, we're going to shut down all the -- ah! [thumps] ah! So many steps! So. Many. Steps. >> Well son, what do you think about the government now? >> I think I want to go into the private sector. [laughs] >> Me too son, me too. Ah, one more thing. >> [everyone] Live from New York it's Saturday Night! >> That's a pretty good one. I like that the executive order smoked. Just gave it a little edge. Okay, so, President Obama issued a controversial executive order on immigration in November of 2014. Now what did this executive order attempt to establish? Obama's executive order offers temporary legal status and reprive from deportation for parents of U.S. citizens and permanent residents plus expansion of the DACA program which provides a legal status for immigrants who came to the U.S. as children. If enacted this executive order would effect four to five million undocumented immigrants out of the total of approximately eleven million estimated to be in the United States. It would give them temporary legal status that would prevent deportation as long as the executive order was in place. President Obama argues that this executive order is legal because as president, he has prosecutorial discretion which simply means that he can decide when to devote the efforts of law enforcement given limited resources to enforcement of immigration law. In this case he argues that he is deciding not to deport a certain class of undocumented immigrants who do not have a criminal record, and have other claims to remain in the country, for example, not breaking up families, not holding people responsible for actions decided by others when they were children. And instead concentrating on deporting those with criminal records and other problems. He also argues that presidents Reagan and George H. W. Bush used executive orders to exempt more than one million undocumented immigrants during their administrations. So he argues that there is some precedent for his actions. In response to the immigration executive order, the state of Texas and 25 other states along with the U.S. House of Representatives sued to prevent execution of Obama's executive order. They argued that the President effectively re-wrote immigration laws and changed the standards for the deportation of unlawfully present adult immigrants. The states also argued that the financial burden of the executive order in terms of the provision of social services for those newly legal immigrants would be too costly. Moreover they argued enforcement of the president's orders would effectively constitute a presidential command to the states to spend their own tax dollars against their wishes, and the president lacks the power to do that. The lawsuit was filed in Texas and the Obama administration lost. The district court agreed with the states and the executive order -- that the executive order exceeded the president's constitutional powers and issued an injunction that prohibited the federal government from enforcing the order. The federal government appealed and lost again. The fifth circuit of appeals in New Orleans upheld the injunction against the president. Now the case is before the Supreme Court which heard arguments in April of 2016. The Supreme Court currently has only eight members because Antonin Scalia recently died and his vacant seat has not yet been filled. Now many observers expect that there will be a four four tie on the Supreme Court for this decision. If that happens, then the injunction preventing the executive order from being executed will be left in place. However there will be no precedent set from this ruling because of the tie on the Supreme Court, so it might come up again. 