 So now let's talk about grand strategy, and I wanna motivate the discussion of grand strategy today with a puzzle. Why does an attack on the World Trade Towers by members of a relatively small, non-governmental organization that had been granted sanctuary by the ruling government of Afghanistan, namely the Taliban, generate an American invasion of Iraq, that is designed first to topple the autocratic regime of Saddam Hussein? These connections are puzzling for a numble, number of reasons. First, Iraq was not involved in the attack on the United States on September 11th. And the government of Saddam Hussein was not allied to the government of Afghanistan. Second, how could the costly policy of regime change in one state transform some set of odd individual incentives that make the execution of terror strikes, so suicide terrorist strikes, less appealing? Quite simply, why would terrorists in Afghanistan, Bali, or East Africa lay down their weapons because Saddam Hussein was thrown from power? I wanna make an argument today that these strategic connections are facilitated by something that policy makers and academics call grand strategy. So, what is grand strategy? Grand strategy is the set of overarching ideas that guide to conduct of foreign policy. These big ideas have often been bundled together in to a broad narrative, or brand, like containment during the cold war, or democracy promotion under Presidents Clinton, Bush, and Obama. Incorporated into this grand strategy brand, are a series of subsidiary ideas, theories, or assumptions about the nature of the International Political Order. The principal sources of security threats faced by the United States. The definition of American national interests. Arguments about the appropriate means to achieve those interests. And then, a set of calculations about how to optimize these means and ends calculations. So as the picture on the slide suggests, we intentionally place grand strategy at the top of a pyramid of American policies that shape and guide how the US should interact with other states. It's useful to think of grand strategy as plying an important organizing or coordinating role among these different dimensions of policy. While some scholars argue that grand strategy is really a theory about the best means by which a country can secure its interests in a competitive international environment, I'm uncomfortable with casting grand strategy as a theory. Instead, I think it is probably most approp, appropriately labeled as an ideology, akin to domestic partisanship in the United States. I make this distinction between ideology, when I talk about ideology, we're talking about the, the alignment of say, Democrats on the left and Republicans on the right in Unite, in the United States.2 And so, I make this distinction between ideology and theory because debates about grand strategy have an important political component to them. While theoretical debates can partially be adjudicated by empirical facts, this is not always the case with larger debates about grand strategy. And so, another way to observe this description is to explicitly cast debates over grand strategy as the international equivalent, and I wanna restate this. So, it's debates over grand strategy, you can think about this as the international equivalent to domestic ideological debates oriented around partisanship and that's what that, those pictures on the slides were designed to represent. Domestic partisan or partisan debates are partially rooted in some theoretical debate, say over the relationship between government intervention in the domestic economy and economic growth. For example, Republicans draw on economic theory associated with Friedrich Hayek or Milton Friedman, to support a limited public role or to support policies that call for a limited public role in economic activity. Alternatively, Democrats are more likely to draw on Keynesian theory to advocate a more active government role in the domesti, in the domestic economy. While the ideological debates rests partially on underlying theoretical claims, the construction of an ideological position is also a political act designed to persuade the American people to support some policy. So, Obama's West Point speech, I would argue, is a characterization of the grand strategy he would pursue. It has some causal claims nested in there about how he thinks the world works. But recognize, this is also a political statement. He's trying to convince people of his vision for how the United States should interact with the world. So, in the same way debates over grand strategy draw on underlying theories about say, the nature of security threats in the international system, and like I said there are also political statements about how to protect American national interests. Why does Obama do this? Why do Presidents do this? They're trying to mobilize domestic political support around some set of foreign policies that they want to pursue. In sum, I think it's helpful to think about debates over grand strategy, which is what we're gonna be covering here over the, over today, and then in class on Thursday, as the international parallel to the domestic debates over partisanship. These competing ideologies provide a brand or narrative about how to promote some set of national interests, while simultaneously providing a ready set, a policy recommendations capable of cheat, achieving those goals. It is important to note that there is some, a mapping of partisanship with grand strategy, but the correlation is not perfect. This means that some members of the same political party will promote very different grand strategic visions. You can see this quite easily by comparing the foreign policy of Rand Paul with the foreign policy ideas of John McCain. While both are Republicans, they have very different visions of Americas role in the world. On the one hand, Rand Paul has been associated with the isolationist wing of the republican party. And he's tried to temper that, in part because he wants to run for president in 2016, and he understands that isolationism is not where the majority of the American public are. So, he's been calling for less military action around the world and cuts to the foreign aid budget. He also often argues that American military involvement around the world can accentuate security problems for the US by creating new enemies. This implies that the U.S. would be safer if it withdrew from some of its commitments around the world. So, lets contrast those foreign policy views with those of Paul's fellow republican John McCain. John McCain has been a consistent supporter for the use of military force to promote democracy abroad. He has not been shy in supporting the surges in both Iraq and Afghanistan and supporting the use of military force in Libya, Syria, and now, Western Iraq. On Sunday he was on CBS's Face the Nation. McCain argued that we need to put more troops into Iraq to fight ISIS, more boots on the ground, because the strategy so far isn't rolling back their gains at all yet. The larger point here though is, even though Paul and McCain are both Republicans, they possess very different views of grand strategy. 