 We have noted that grand strategy and foreign policy tends to be related to but not identical to partisanship. Consequently, different grand strategies can be found within the same party and grand strategies - the same grand strategy can sometimes unite politicians across partisan divides. And as often this was often seen in the Cold War, there were a lot of advocates of containment both within the Democratic Party and within the Republican party, during the conflict with the Soviet Union. We also noted that grand strategy is necessarily more abstract than specific policies because it is meant to apply to a variety of situations that may differ in substantial ways. And so, grand strategy is an approach. It, it has a broad vision of how the world works. And then, what the United States should do to combat threats within that world. Now we are gonna get a bit more specific. Grand strategy, while necessarily abstract, tends to be concrete enough to count in several identifiable varieties and forms. So, over the next two lectures, this lecture and Thursday, we are going to discuss four main visions of grand strategy. Arguable, four competing visions of grand strategy. Isolationism, which we'll talk about today, selective engagement, liberal internationalism, and primacy. So, those are the four grand strategies that you'll need to be familiar with that we'll cover in some detail. One thing to remember about grand strategies is that they are best understood in relation to one another, as relative rather than absolute positions. So one is more or less, isolationist and this may mean different things during different time periods, as our historical examples will demonstrate. And so, these labels are useful because they demarcate different relative positions but you can't be too strict about the label because sometimes in a particular instance, a politician will sort of verge a little bit away from a certain category. So grand strategies then, vary along several different dimensions, that we wanna go over. The first is the scope. The geographic scope of interests. Whether that scope is global and broad or regional and narrow. All right? Secondly, there is a relative position about the central strategy that will be taken on the means, the instruments that the United States will use. Whether, they will tend to go uni, in a unilateral position or direction, meaning going alone, you, relying on only U.S. power and U.S. decision-making. Or in a mul, in a more multilateral direction, working with partners and international organizations. Thirdly, there is a debate about the use of power. Does the grand strategy emphasize hard power? Which tends to be associated with military force or soft power, we, which tends to be more in line with economic levers, or political clout and diplomacy, or even culture, and there was a, a question in the last lecture about this distinction between hard power and soft power. And so, the, the most basic way to differentiate the two is hard power, is using military force or tends to be using military force and coercion. As opposed to soft power, which tends to use persuasion, if you will, and influence. And so we'll talk more about that as we use these terms. And finally, the fourth wa, component of grand strategy is the central problem that the United States is facing at the time. Defining the problem and that's, the characteristics of the threat, is very, a very important aspect to grand strategies. And we'll talk about this in, when we go over containment and that grand strategy, and we'll talk a lot about this, when we talk about the Obama speech. What is the central problem? Is it nuclear, threats is at trying to keep the world at a safe distance. Is it preventing the rise of of a major rival? Or is it sort of just maintaining a more hospitable international security environment? So, these are the components of grand strategy. Now, when defining national interests, competing grand strategies can have more narrow conceptions of our interests. For example, isolationism emphasizes physical security of the homeland. Avoiding invasion. All right or gran, a grand strategy can have more expansive that is global conceptions of national interest, for example liberal internationalism as a grand strategy sees U.S. interests as including the security not only of the homeland to avoid attack. But also the security of it's allies. And, the economic well being of the country. And the maintenance of free trade. And the protection of American ideals, like human rights and democracy. And so the national interest is much more expansive, for these types of grand strategies. Now when it comes to defining, global threats, there are two key components. The first is the scope of the threat. Whether it is a narrow scope. Again isolationists isolationists often view threats in more narrow terms, or expansive and global threats. As the other three grand strategies to varying degrees as you'll see, see outside threats. And so, either in narrow scope of threat or a, an expansive global scope of threat. The 2nd thing about threats, though is the identity of the threat. That is, the identity of the threatening state, or the group of states, or the transnational organization or the ideology, right? For example, the central threat during containment, was the Soviet Union and communism more widely. The central threat for the so called war on terror, is ISIS and Al Qaeda and other terrorist organizations, defining the identity of the threat also means characterizing the nature of that threat. The way that they view the United States and the world, their long term and short term goals and their preferred means. You have to understand your enemy. And so only when you know your enemy, can you effectively devise a strategy to combat that en, enemy. Similarly when choosing means there are two main factors. The approach towards means, usually casts a debate between unilateralism, going it alone, and multilateralism, working with partners. And secondly, it's the type of means. And again, this is emphasizing military force, which is characteristic of certain grand strategies, or, emphasizing other means, such as economic sanctions, or political pressure, diplomacy, and the like. And so those are the combolent, components, as I should say, of grand strategy. 