 Now what we want to do is talk about one of the principle readings that was assigned for today, and this is the Obama West Point speech. And we assigned this speech to give you an example of a broader grand strategy statement. So in the pre-class modules we defined what is grand strategy and we talked about the elements of it. What I want to do now is just work through the speech a little bit and point out how numerous elements of it reflect or represent a grand strategy. And so the first thing to realize is there's a clear statement of American goals as defined by the Obama administration in that statement. So number one, like you guys, he elevates terrorism as the greatest threat facing the United States and so our principle national interest has to be geared around counter terrorism policies. The second key goal here, and I think this is interesting and we can think about this contrasting it with the Bush national security statement that we read last week is there's a call in the Obama doctrine for the broader promotion of human dignity and I read this as much more expansive -- and he often equates human dignity with freedom but I think he goes beyond that and basically says there's a moral responsibility to promote justice and welfare for the broader global citizenry. I actually read this as going further than just support for democracy promotion that we see in the Bush national security statement. There's an element here, although it's subsidiary, Obama talks about the importance of rebuilding the national economy, we have an interest in that so we're capable of projecting strength. And then the other thing, and I talked about this already a little bit, these goals, they are rooted in an element of moral obligation here. And so if we think back to our conversation with Professor Inboden earlier in the semester, there is this moral and ethical element to American foreign policy, or at least how Presidents are defining American grand strategy in terms of our national interest. So, on the one hand, this is a statement of grand strategy because he's talking about national interest and political goals that the United States should be pursuing relative to other countries around the world. Second, remember grand strategy it's about a statement of goals, but it's also a statement and comments on means, and there are multiple elements where Obama is talking about the means that the United States should employ to realize these broad national interests. The first thing that's I think unique or interesting in this document, and this is -- I mean you can envision presidential administrations as being in dialogue with each other, part of this document is a push back against the grand strategy of the Bush administration, but one of the things that Obama emphasizes in this document is that the United States cannot rely solely on military power to get what it wants around the world. Yes he says the military still has to be the backbone of American leadership, however we can't always rely on military force. Why? Because the consistent use of military force is gonna generate a broader backlash in the world, and here's an acknowledgment of the security dilemma that we talked about earlier in the semester, we might create more enemies if we always use military force to get what we want. As a consequences we can actually make the United States less secure if we are over reliant on military force. As a consequence we have to think about alternative mechanisms to realize our interests, we have to rely on partners, we have to rely on international institutions. International institutions can be effective in getting what we want. The big thing that I want to point out here on this broader comment on means that is going to have important implications when we talk about Syria. What is unique in this document is Obama's desire to increase the utilization of foreign troops in prosecuting the broader war against terrorism. What do I mean by this? He's going to say repeatedly not only in this document but then later on, we can't consistently rely on American troops to do the heavy lifting or the most significant fighting and combat roles, to say fight ISIS in Syria, to fight Al-Qaeda in Afghanistan, instead we need to rely on local militaries, local partners, we are going to assume a tremendous role in aiding these partners, providing the military and providing them training, however, we can't have American troops on the ground responding to every threat because it can then generate this backlash that Obama is so worried about. And so this is a different national policy with respect to the means that will be employed to counter these threats. Rob you want to [inaudible] >>One thing to note on this two the domestic dimension in the intersection between international and domestic here, surely one reason that Obama is providing some push-back against over reliance on the military is the domestic consequences of using military force in the sense of public support for these long term engagements and so that -- part of the unwritten, unspoken, argument here is that the American public simply won't, and the American economy won't, tolerate these kinds of long term military engagements, and so that combined with the international reaction is part of the story. >>And this is something important to keep in mind as you evaluate the coming campaign, and this is coming from -- think about this in terms of the policy solutions that are offered by both the Democrats and Republicans. On the whole, generally, well at least on the Republican side with the exception of Rand Paul, and I would say on the democratic side when it comes to the policy positions of Secretary Clinton, they are pushing a more aggressive response to ISIS than Obama is -- >>[inaudible] >> -- and that yes, relying more on military power, one of the things that I think is interesting is Obama is acutely aware that the American public isn't going to support this, and it's much easier to talk tough in a campaign and it's a different story when you are now in the business of governing and you have to respond to the American people and so this is a situation in which the campaign is getting out in front of really where the American public is on this issue. There's not a lot of stomach for putting say 100 thousand troops in Syria right, there's actually no stomach for it. >> One other thing about this is it's noteworthy that this is isn't in his speech and it's not part of even what Rand Paul says when we get to his reaction about why we should limit our engagement, politicians aren't gonna say we're not gonna do this because the American public doesn't have a stomach for it because that would create a backlash as well. That suggests a flaw in the American public and that's something politicians aren't gonna bring up. So it's very much an unwritten, underlying aspect of this. >>So the third component of grand strategy that's in this document is an identification of threats and the nature of these threats. So obviously we've already talked about this, terrorism is the most prominent threat facing the United States, and as a consequence it shapes and it's nested within the broader set of policy recommendations that the Obama doctrine here is making to realize American national interests. So if we put terrorism at the top, and then there's a couple other ones, China's rise and Russia. Although China's rise there's a couple of mentions in there I think of the South China Sea but it doesn't play a really big part in the speech, this is more about -- I read this as ticking off standard items that are supposed to be on the checklist. It's more critical of Russia's role particularly in Ukraine, but again, there's a hierarchy of threats here and the number one that the Obama administration says its grand strategy is going to be oriented around is the threat posed by terrorism. The fourth thing that I want to point out here and say that this is a statement of grand strategy is there's also a comment in there on the grand strategies that don't work, there's a critique in there of isolationism. The U.S. can't retreat to its borders as we've down in the past. Why? Because there are things around the world that are going to impact us no matter what and as a consequence the US has an interest in responding to these threats around the world to make sure that our civil liberties and our freedoms and the security of our citizens aren't impinged or threatened by these developments around the world. So we can't be isolationists this is a global world. He also criticizes what a future reading is gonna describe, and this reading you're gonna look at next week, what might be described as liberal hegemony or position, or grand strategy of primacy. And here Obama is saying we can't rely on military force -- I should say unilateral military force to solve all the problems around in the world because that's going to generate a backlash, and so similar to I think his general domestic political instincts, this grand strategy statement is also a compromise, specifically it says I want to try to carve out a middle ground between historical grand strategies that the United States has implemented, on the one side isolationism, on the other side liberal hegemony or primacy. What he's arguing is neither one of these things are going to work and so I'm trying to carve out a middle way. The final element of this document that I want to talk a little bit about to give us some more sense of how it's a statement of grand strategies -- There's a broad assessment of the state of the world here, right. He wants to challenge people that are arguing that the United States is in decline. And this has been a consistent theme in Obama's statements over the last two or three years, specifically targeting Republican presidential candidates and Republican opposition for saying that the U.S. is in decline, Obama says absolutely not, our global leadership is not slipping away. And this then factors into a conversation that really, and I don't want to say elevates because this has been a long view inside the United States about America's role in the world, but there is a characterization of the United States as an indispensable nation. Here we have an important really acknowledgment of America's unique role in the global order today. And part of the idea behind this, the U.S. as an indispensable nation is that there's a whole array of threats that can't generally -- that increasingly can't be handled unilaterally by governments, by individual governments, instead we need much broader collaborations. So the case in Syria is a perfect example of this. Syria is impinging on the interests of multiple countries around the world. We've talked about the refugee crisis in Europe, if you talk about growing Iranian influences in the region, if you talk about Russian attempts to maintain a foothold in the middle east, if you talk about American efforts to try and support fledgling democracy in Iraq, Syria invokes on all of these things and increasingly -- or the concern is, if the U.S. doesn't lead, other countries will sit back and allow things to get worse. And there was an op-ed in the Washington Post yesterday, David Ignatious talking about recent war games in Israel, about how to -- what should we do if ISIS turns to attack Israel, and one of the implications that came out of these war games in Israel was everybody in the region is waiting for the United States to lead here, and this just reinforce -- they're kind of -- they're adopting a cautious policy because they're waiting for United States to set the agenda, potentially put more troops on the ground or to signal how they're going to handle Russian influence in the region and Russian intervention in Syria. The point here is there are big global problems that need multilateral cooperation and the world generally relies on the United States to lead in these challenges, if the U.S. doesn't lead, the problems don't get fixed. And just as a backdrop to this broader conversation about what does it mean for the U.S. to be an indispensable nation, many of these ideas are rooted in the interwar period between WW1 and WW2, and the argument here is that the United States steps back from the peace that's created in 1919 and 1920 because the American senate and the American public don't support the League of Nations, and so when the U.S. steps back from Europe Europe is put on a track in the mid nineteen twenties that leads to the emergence of Hitler that leads to economic collapse and ultimately leads to war in 1939. And so these ideas about the U.S. being the indispensable nation, in part they're harkening back to the failures of American, or what's viewed as the failure of American policy in the interwar period and the counterfactual here is if the U.S. had stayed engaged in global and European politics in the 1920s or 1930s, or more actively engaged perhaps is a better way to say it, then Europe might have -- the world might have been able to avoid the consequences associated with WW2. This bears on the arguments that Obama is making in this document as well. We can't step back. Though it doesn't say it specifically, the implication is we can't step back like we did in the 1920s, if we step back again in 2016 the world is going to explode without us. Moreover other countries are relying on us and they're shaping their strategies in expectation of what we're gonna do. One thing I want to point out here is if you're trying to understand kind of theoretically what does this mean about the U.S. as indispensable nation, what are the obligations, when we talk about hegemonic stability theory later on in the semester I'm going to draw a parallel back to this conversation and that will provide some of the broader justification here and also help you to think about why might any country be indispensable and the larger issue is there's something called collective action problem. They're these transnational problems that can't simply be solved by individual governments. >>And there's some tensions here, I mean clearly President Obama who believes that the United States is the indispensable nation, he says it time and again, although I would say that he applies it kind of selectively. So when he really wants the United States to intervene in a certain crisis then he says, you know, of course, the United States is the indispensable nation. There was a crisis around the Ebola virus and there was a lot of push back about well why does the United States over and over again have to shoulder these burdens, and he says, "Look, we just gotta get used to it. We are the indispensable nation." He used that term. Of course everyone looks to us, that's the way it just is, it has to be. But then when he doesn't want to intervene there's much less mention of the U.S. as an indispensable nation and much more we can't be intervening time and again, especially with military force in all of these crises, we need partners, we need regional actors to bear the burden. And I think that there is an implicit tension in those two sort of assumptions and how one -- one doesn't have to be a primacy, a grand strategist, to believe that the United States is the indispensable nation, but there is a tension here between multilateralism and all of these things in that aspect. >>Well the other thing is there's been an important evolution for Obama on this question during his administration. And so remember he comes into office in January of 2009 and the world is in the midst of the great recession, the largest economic crisis that the world has faced since the Great Depression and I can remember he goes to a very public -- he goes to Davos in January of 2009, and these are annual meetings, global economic leaders that talk about the state of the economy, and this is one of his first public statements on the world stage, and he goes there in 2009 and he says listen, the game has changed for everybody else around the world, we can't solve everyone's problems, and he was talking about the global economy, increasingly, because what's happened over the last sixty years, everybody has relied on the American consumer to generate economic growth. In a sense, you've been hanging onto our backs to generate economic growth the last 50 or 60 years, you can't look to the American economy to grow yourself out of bad economic policies anymore. And so, this is essentially a statement that says well, "You need to shoulder more responsibility in meeting global economic challenges." That pushes away from this idea that the U.S. is an indispensable nation and I think in this document we can see a clear embrace of those principles. And I think this is -- this reflects a change during his presidency. 