 ﻿1 The very first module of this course presented a series of overarching questions that has organized or guided our content all semester. One of these questions asks how do external forces like war and globalization shape the institutions, identity, and policies of the United States? You should think about this module as being oriented around introducing you to the concept of globalization, so you can begin to think more generally about how such economic pressures associated with market competition influence the international political order, more broadly, and American foreign policy, more specifically. This module also serves as the final transition in the content for the course. The first 2/3 of the course has focused on a series of substantive policy challenges facing the United States. These policy challenges have been organized around what you might think of as the sources of order in international politics. One focused on military force, the second focused on political sources of order and talked about relations among great powers, international organizations, and regime type, or specifically, the presence or absence of democracy within states. The third source of international political order, to which we now turn, highlights how economic pressures associated with globalization shape politics among states, and as a consequence, US foreign policy. This module introduces globalization, and talks about it in the context of US trade policy. You might think about trade policy as government efforts to regulate the movement of goods and services into and out of the American economy. Upcoming segments will talk about globalization in financial terms and discuss exchange rates, bond markets, and capital flows across national boundaries. This module proceeds in five segments. The first defines globalization and competition. The second introduces the Ricardian Model of Trade, and something called comparative advantage, to answer a very basic question, why do states trade with each other? The answer is straightforward, states trade because it makes them wealthier. The third lecture segment builds on the prior segment by providing the foundations for understanding a paradox associated with globalization. If international trade makes nations richer, then why does it tend to animate political conflict among countries and groups within countries? We discuss a revision of Ricardian Theory that shows how international trade redistributes wealth, making some groups richer, and some groups poorer, while it simultaneously makes nations in general, and in the aggregate, richer. These differential effects within countries motivates much of the controversy associated with globalization. You can also think about the third segment as helping to generate some ideas, or predictions about which groups within a country might support American efforts to promote more globalization and trade around the world. In other words, the trade theories that we will discuss help us to understand societal interest with respect to American foreign economic policy. The fourth segment asks how do domestic institutions, inside the United States, influence the content of American trade policy? It introduces the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act, and talks about its modern descendant, fast track authority. The final segment talks about international organizations, like the World Trade Organization, that influence American trade policy. 