 We now want to start this discussion of America's role in the larger global economy by defining what we mean by globalization. We are going to discuss it strictly in economic terms during the final section of the course. So globalization is the integration of national economies into a single global economy through the reduction of national barriers to trade. Integration of national economies into the single global economy through the reduction of barriers to trade. These barriers to trade can be natural barriers like distance. Some services like haircuts won't even -- simply are not tradeable because they cost so much less than the transportation cost associated with purchasing them somewhere else. For example, hair cuts then are not tradeable. It makes no sense to pay $1,000 to fly to Paris to get a hair cut, when I can reasonably get a good hair cut up in Round Rock from my barber for $10. Now, Pat McDonald has flirted with the idea of flying to Paris to get the hair cut that he is sporting right now, but he has instead opted for -- >> This all sports. >> Product. >> 18 bucks. >> Lots of product. >> Whole bunch of product over there. Second, the barriers to trade can also be technological. You can see this in how technological advances help overcome the hurdles associated with distance to make it possible to buy things from abroad. So in the 19th century railroads and steam engines made it more cost effective to sell grain from the American mid-west to Europe. There was a sustained period of globalization in the latter part of the 19th century through the outbreak of World War I, that was really driven by falling transportation costs made possible by steam and railways. Third, the barriers to trade are often political. Governments impose barriers to trade, the most common of which is tariffs. To make it more difficult for foreign companies to market their products consumers at home within the country. Tariffs raise the cost of imports. Since 1945, governments have successfully pushed down tariffs through a series of multilateral trade deals, often led by the United States, in this way a sustained period of globalization since 1945 has been fueled by falling political barriers to trade. The reduction of national barriers to trade helps to facilitate the creation of a single Global marketplace. We want you to take away at least one important descriptive attribute of this global economy. As national barriers fall, competition gets extremely intense in the global economy. The scope of competition among firms is a function of the size of the market. If the United States did not trade with any other economy, if we insulated our economy perfectly from global competition, then you would find yourself effectively competing with the roughly three hundred and sixteen million Americans for a job. When the United States eliminates barriers to trade, now, all of a sudden, you find yourself competing with over seven billion global citizens for a job. Migration and the internet have helped to make the labor market more global. For example, 25 years ago, if you were an accountant, you did well, and made a ton of money at tax time. The onset of the internet age has now made it possible for firms and the IRS to offshore a lot of accounting jobs to India, where accountants get paid a lot less because there are so many more of them. This has helped push down the cost of accounting services for consumers in the U.S., but then it's also magnified competition for accounting jobs. So Pat you're going to... >> Yeah so let me give you another example, >> Yeah. >> That illustrates how globalization magnifies the intensity of economic competition. This example harkens back to the very first day of class. >> You think you're so funny. >> This is a good one. When Rob talked about winning the State Class C high school football championship in Nebraska, Rob was a legend on that team. A mauler at offensive guard, weighing in at an opposing 170 pounds. >> Note, though, that I said class C. He lived in a town of 20,000 people. If there were two high schools in town, the two football coaches had a limited labor supply of high school kids to draw on for their team. >> But, we were scrappy. >> You were scrappy, yeah. So, how did these competitive dynamics change when Rob goes to college? Does he get a scholarship offer to play for the Cornhuskers at the University of Nebraska? Nope. Why? Well, the magnitude of competition changed dramatically among players vying for a spot at Nebraska. It was a nationally ranked program, so their coach could draw on a national labor pool to find the best players. In short, the level of football competition in Nebraska at the position of offensive guard escalated dramatically for Rob when moving from a high school in a town of 20,000 people to a program that could recruit individuals from all across the country in Division I football. So, the point here is that competition is a function of the size of the market. And, the same thing that limited Rob's ability to play college football operates in global markets. Globalization increases the size of the market, and the scope or level of competition within that market. >> So, I just decided to go out on top. And, decline the many offers I had to play football at the college level. I'm gonna, that is my story, and I'm sticking with it. >> All right, all right, all right. >> Okay, now, I would just like to briefly outline the process by which competition gets generated in markets. Now, this will help us understand why barriers to trade help to protect domestic firms. Economic actors interact through the price mechanism in competitive markets. The ability to charge lower prices than a rival firm is a mark of efficiency. It allows a competitive firm to remain in business by selling their products to consumers. If firms cannot cover their costs through sales, they go out of business. In a competitive market, firms cannot independently set prices. If they try to set them too high, above their competitors, consumers buy from their cheaper competitors. And, the high price firm goes out of business as its sales dry up. This market competition pushes firms to drive their costs down. So, they can pass on savings to their customers, and push their rivals out of business, right? Inefficient firms, though, can pursue an alternative strategy to remain in business if they are unable to cut costs. They can lobby the government for some type of support that enhances their competitive competition. This support can take the form of cheap loans, or subsidies, that drop their business costs. It can take the form of government contracts that guarantee some level of sales volume. Or, it can take the form of barriers to entry that prevent rival firms from selling to their customer base. Tariffs are one form of market protection that keep foreign firms out of the domestic market. Tariffs are a tax that the government imposes on a good when they cross, when the good crosses over into the United States. The foreign producer has to pass that cost of business, that tariff, on to the consumer. As a result, tariffs keep out foreign competition by increasing the price of foreign products relative to the same products produced by domestic firms. Okay. So, let's round out this conversation by talking about how a reduction in barriers to trade helps to create a single global economy, and increase the intensity of competition within that single global economy. We'll start by restating the crucial takeaway point, an increase in tariff barriers increases the price of imported goods, and decreases competition in the domestic economy. Alternatively, tariff cuts decrease the price of imported goods, and increase competition in the domestic economy. In this way, tariff cuts are a powerful device to import more competition into the domestic economy, and drive consumer prices down. We can illustrate these pressures with an example, the fading textile industry in the United States. Textiles are a labor intensive industry. Higher labor cost in the United States raise the cost of producing t-shirts and underwear, in the United States. So, imagine that the average wage in a textile factory in the United States is $12 an hour. That means it costs slightly less than $2,000 a month to hire a textile worker in South Carolina. Contrast this with wage rates in Bangladesh in 2011, which were about $0.60 an hour. This means you can hire about 21 textile workers in Bangladesh for the price of one worker in the United States. Guess what? 21 workers can make more shirts than one worker. This means the cost of production are much lower in Bangladesh. American textile firms remain in business by relying on tariff barriers that raise the costs to American consumers of shirts made in Bangladesh. Without these tariffs, shirt prices would fall. And the American firms would be out of business at an even faster rate. Most importantly, this example shows that the elimination of political barriers to trade, which help to foster a single global economy, forces domestic producers to compete with the most efficient producers that exist in the global economy. They no longer compete with a smaller number of domestic producers. >> So there's a question on the board that I want to talk about that also illustrates the tension or the paradox that's a, a function of globalization. And so the question is simple, is competition good? And the answer is, there's no short answer to that because competition like globalization creates these contradictory pressures. So, in terms of competition, if you're a consumer, you would say competition is good because competition drives down the price of goods, which means that you can pay less for goods, and you'll have then more money to either save or buy other goods. So in this sense, competition increases your real income by driving down the cost of things that you need to buy. >> Not only that, it generates pressures for innovation and quality. >> Right? Because one way to sell more products is not just to cut prices, cut prices, but to come up with something new or something better. Apple. >> Yeah. >> Is a great example of that. Competition is what helps to fuel those sorts of innovations as well. >> Yeah. Absolutely. So far, we've just been talking and treating goods as if they have two dimensions, price and quantity, and but you also have to add quality here and firms compete along these lines as well. Now the other thing though if -- and so there's always two sides to this coin. If you're the firm that's now facing new competition from Asia and they're paying their workers 6 to 10% of what you're paying your workers, competition is a huge problem for you. Because these differences in wage rates are driven by fundamental demographic differences that you can't change or you can't alter. And so you're stuck. And so the firms, a lot of manufacturing firms, say in textile or automobile manufacturing in the United States, the way that they've maintain their competitiveness or at least returns to their shareholders is they've had to move their factories from South Carolina or Detroit to Mexico, or China or Vietnam. And, so, in this sense, competition isn't good for those firms, or the workers at their firms. And, this is the paradox of competition of globalization. Joseph Schumpeter talked about globalization as a process of creative destruction, and that illustrates these contradictory tendencies. On one hand, it creates wealth by driving down consumer costs. On the other hand, it destroys inefficiencies, and people that are in inefficient sectors, they get driven out, and they lose their jobs, and they actually see their wages fall. 