 Let's transition here and talk and answer the question, why do states trade? If competition is so brutal in this global economy, why do states trade? The answer's simple. Participation in international trade makes a country wealthier. You can see this through the simple consumer gains in the t-shirt example that Rob just discussed. If we can buy products cheaper from foreign producers, that leaves American consumers with more money to buy more stuff or to save or to invest to increase our income in the future. The basic logic behind this claim, that trade increases national income, rests on one of the most important economic theories ever generated. David Ricardo's Theory of Comparative Advantage. The idea can be a little challenging to grasp, initially. So, we wanna spend a little time here working through its basics and then offer some examples. The gains from trade stem from differences in the relative efficiency of firms or individuals to produce goods. Ricardo argued that countries should specialize in the production of goods that were produced most cheaply at home, with the lowest costs. This means that countries should move their productive inputs like capital and labor into a small number of sectors. So Ricardo is about specialization. Then countries could maximize their income by trading surplus production in a narrow range of goods for products that are produced more cheaply abroad. Now, the policy implication is clear. If you specialize -- if specialization and trade increases national income, then barriers to trade, like tariffs, reduce national income. Therefore, free trade policies are a powerful means to increase national income. I think it's also important to note here, though, that these ideas really generalize to countries some of the principles that we already know that individuals do on a daily basis in a developed economy. We as individuals don't produce everything that we consume on a daily basis. Instead we specialize in the production of a few things. For me, it's educational services. And then we trade that surplus production of educational services for goods and services like my house, food and gas for my car that would be relatively more expensive for me to produce on my own. One way to illustrate these principles is to examine the costs of the failure to specialize with a few examples. Right? That we don't produce everything we consume on a daily basis. Did you want to jump in on this? >> No. >> All right. So, so quite simply, right, I can ask Rob. Did you milk a cow today to get milk for your cereal? >> Surprisingly no. >> No, right? That would be incredibly inefficient. >> I Could. >> He could. Yes, because he's from Nebraska, right? Did you grow the corn to make your tortilla? No. Did you fix your car the last time it broke down? >> Yes. Well. >> Well, I jumped my car. >> All right. But you didn't do any major mechanical work? >> No, I didn't do that, no. >> Did you chop the trees down to build your house? No, right? Why not? Because it's costly to do all of these things. We have to learn how to do all of these things. We have to learn how to be a contractor. We have to learn how to fix engines. We have to learn weather patterns so we can raise corn and raise milk. We don't all do these things, because in a sense, we choose something that we're -- that we think we're more efficient at, and then we specialize. Right? So for Rob to do all these things, it would take away from his primary responsibilities, which are managing the government department as the Chair, and working on lectures for this course. So -- >> In that order. >> In that order, yes. So the point here is that we're talking about the policy implications of globalization are that if you want to increase national income, you should cut barriers to trade, open up your domestic markets to international competition. This policy implication is directly comparable to what individuals do on a daily basis. We don't produce everything we consume. We specialize and we do that to increase our individual wealth. So, let's not talk about the idea behind comparative advantage in more detail. And so, we have an example up on the slide that I wanna work through. This is gonna help us to illustrate the differences between absolute advantage and comparative advantage. So, imagine the following situation that's listed on this slide. It takes 100 labor hours in the United States to make a mid-sized car. Then assume it takes 150 labor hours in Japan to make the same car. Now, assume it takes 200 labor hours inside the United States to design the next hot selling iPad app. And then imagine that it takes 1,000 labor hours in Japan to design the next hot selling application for iPads. Now the United States possesses an absolute advantage in producing both cars and apps. That means that it takes fewer labor hours in the United States to make a car than it does to make a car in Japan, and it takes fewer labor hours inside the United States to make that new app than it does in Japan to make that new app. So, the question is should the two countries trade with each other? Now, Adam Smith said no. He argued that the US couldn't gain from trade because it possessed an absolute advantage in the production of both goods, cars and apps in this example. This then opens up a question, if you're a policymaker, trying to pursue policies that increase national wealth should you incentivize the production of apps, cars, or both? What should you do? So we can answer this question by answering another. Do the efficiency gains in apps for the United States outweigh the efficiency gains in cars? And this is going to bring us back to Ricardo and the, the conception of comparative advantage. So David Ricardo argued that we should focus on the comparative costs of both goods in both countries. So in other words, ask yourself two things. First, how many cars does the US have to give up producing if it focuses solely on building paths? Second, how does this ratio compare to the same one in Japan? Mainly, how many cars does Japan have to give up producing if it opts to make only apps instead? In other words, you can't make a prediction about the gains from trade in the automobile industry simply by comparing the cost of making cars in Japan and the United States. Smith made that calculation and he was wrong. And Ricardo said he was wrong. Instead, what Ricardo was saying is you have to compare these relative costs with the relative cost of production in another country. So you need to know the costs in labor terms of making all four products. Automobiles in Japan, automobiles in the United States, and apps in the United States, and apps in Japan. In the case that I just gave you, the United States is more efficient than Japan in the production of both apps and cars. However, the efficiency advantage that the US enjoys over Japan is much larger in apps than in cars. The US is one and a half times as efficient as Japan in making cars, but it's five times more efficient than Japan in making the software apps. Ricardo's arguments implies that the US should focus its production in sectors where those relative efficiency gains are the largest. This means that the US can get wealthier by moving all of its resources into making software apps, making a surplus of those apps, and then trading that surplus to Japan for cars. Because cars cost relatively more for the United States to produce than apps. Now states always have a comparative advantage in something. What Ricardo was saying is that states should specialize in the production of that something and then trade. If all states were to adopt this as an economic strategy, then all states would gain from trade. And you might think about trade here as a means of indirect production. So I now want you take a couple of big implications from this discussion. First, states can increase aggregate income from specialization and trade. We measure this aggregate income, say in gross domestic product. The sum total of all goods and services produced in an economy in a given year. So first, states can increase aggregate income from specialization and trade. Second, and this is the puzzling and factor and generates some controversy with respect to trade inside of the United States. American workers in the automobile sector are not just competing with Japanese workers in the automobile sector, these automobile workers in Michigan are also competing with software programmers in Austin for jobs. If these comparative costs hold, Ricardo's argument suggests that the US should move its workers from automobiles into software. However, we're gonna see a problem with this in a second. Even if such internal economic changes increase national income, they do so unevenly. And think about the automobile worker here. That automobile worker is going to have to pay the cost of retraining so that he or she can be competitive in the software programming market. This probably means going back to school, but this is a costly investment that must be undertaken, this is important, while surrendering that salary in the automobile manufacturing sector. So as a brief recap, let me reiterate one of the central ideas of this discussion. States trade, remember, we started with "why do states trade?" States trade because it increases national income. Now this implies that barriers to trade, like tariffs, reduce national income. These barriers hurt consumer welfare by driving up the price of consumer goods. Consumers are thus left with less money to buy other things or save. These ideas are grounded in the principle of comparative advantage. Ricardo argued that Adam Smith was wrong when it came to international trade. Trade policy should not be based on absolute advantage. States should specialize in the production of goods where their relative costs were lowest. They could then sell surplus production of that good into global markets using the proceeds to purchase goods that were produced relatively more cheaply abroad. 