 Pat's discussion of Ricardo generates an important question. If trade is so good for the national economy, then why haven't all countries hit that free trade nirvana in which barriers to trade have just been completely eliminated? Are policymakers and citizens just a little too dense to understand Ricardo's basic insight that's well over 200 years old now? Of course, the answer to that is no. Ricardo only has part of the answer with respect to society's interest in free trade. Ricardo tells us that international trade increases the size of the economic pie, makes countries wealthier, arguably. But he doesn't tell us anything about what happens to the size of the pieces within that economic pie. And here comes one of the big challenges associated with globalization. Standard trade theory, specifically the Heckscher-Ohlin framework, tells us that globalization alters the distribution of income within an economy just as it increases the aggregate income of the economy as a whole. Now, what does that mean? Quite simply, some groups see their real wages increase while other groups see their real wages fall. You can see this in the declining size of the manufacturing sector over the last 30 years. For example, the automobile industry has shrunk significantly, particularly in the aftermath of the bankruptcies of GM and Chrysler during the financial crisis. Let's say you were an auto worker making $30 an hour, or about $60,000 a year. You lose your job as GM downsizes. Sure, you can find a new job in the service sector, say at Walmart, but the problem here is that your salary probably fell to $12 an hour, which means you are now making about $24,000 a year. Yes, globalization probably helps to hold down the price of cars. But car manufacturing -- manufacturers are taking advantage of cheaper labor costs in places like Mexico and China. As a consumer, you can buy cheaper clothes and cheaper TVs. However, as a worker, your salary just collapsed, if you're in certain sectors, by over 50%. The benefits of globalization are not distributed evenly across society. That is the chief, bottom line that I'm trying to say here. In fact, some groups face real income losses from trade. Trade produces winners and losers. These income losses give these groups, the losers, right, a powerful reason to lobby for trade policies like tariffs that insulate the American economy from international competition. In some trade models, these differential consequences of globalization stem from factor endowments. What are factor endowments? They're the relative quantities of key factors of production, things like land, labor, and capital that you find in United States. These relative factor endowments, say the relative number of college graduates in the United States versus college graduates in China, set the relative prices of these factors as inputs into the production process. Because the United States has lots of skilled labor, which is usually indicated via college degree, the cost of hiring a college graduate is cheaper than some hiring -- hiring some resource that is relatively scarce in the United States, like land with oil reserves in it. International trade helps to create jobs in sectors that rely disproportionately on resources that the United States possesses in abundance. This abundance drives down the cost of these factors and makes goods that rely on them as inputs relatively cheaper. For example, globalization has helped to fuel job creation in sectors that rely heavily on college graduates, like financial services and the high tech sector. In short, by earning a college degree, you are well positioned to gain from globalization. You're doing the right thing being here at UT. Firms are going to produce goods that intensively used your skill set. Seeing new opportunities to market their products to foreign consumers, they will try to expand production. This growth in production capacity though will mean incentivizing you to work for them. Because people respond to price signals, these firms will have to pay you higher wages. Thus owners of abundant factories -- factors of production tend to see their real wages increase from globalization. Alternatively, jobs are lost in sectors that rely disproportionately on resources that are scarce in the United States. Let's use an example that we talked about earlier. Manufactured jobs, manufacturing jobs generally require lower skill levels than, say computer programmers. Globalization opens up this manufacturing, say in cars, to heightened competition with manufacturers in China that can pay their workers much lower wages. This differential in production cost eliminates manufacturing jobs in the United States. What is the problem here for unskilled labor, those without college degrees? Job creation is in the sectors that intensively use high skill labor like the high tech sector and financial services. This means that lower skill workers struggle to find new work as they are not sufficiently qualified in the sectors that gain from globalization, the sectors that are paying their workers more money. As a consequence, people who used to work in factories now go work in the service sector with lower wages. At a very broad level, the owners of scarce factors of production, like unskilled labor in the US, see real income losses from globalization. This differential impact from globalization gives us a way to answer the question that motivated this section. Why do states restrict trade if free trade increases the aggregate national income? The simple answer is that globalization redistributes income within a domestic economy, pushing the wages up for some groups and pushing wages down for other groups. We should expect the groups that see their income fall from trade to lobby the government to limit imports. They will pressure their government to raise tariffs or to refrain from joining trade pacts like NAFTA, the North American Free Trade Association. And this political resistance provides one way to understand why governments insulate their domestic economies from international competition. 