 Given that globalization generates real conflict within society, over whether or not a government should pursue free trade policies, how do we know which groups are likely to win out in this battle? First, remember that we gave one answer to this question earlier in the semester when we were trying to understand the organizational hurdles associated with lobbying efforts by groups within society to alter public policy. Even though they gained from trade, consumers are poor advocates for free trade policies, because the free rider problem inhibits their ability to form a cohesive group that can effectively speak in one voice to elected officials to change policy. Consequently, their policy preferences, the policy preferences of consumers, rarely grab the attention of elected officials. Second, domestic institutions help to structure the process by which competing societal preferences, say over trade policy, are aggregated to produce policy outputs. These institutions can give special advantage to certain interests over others. In this way institutions help to determine the winners and losers in trade policy. So for example, agriculture remains one of the last protected sectors in the American economy, in large part because of the Senate's role in shaping legislative outcomes. To become law, the House, the President, and the Senate must approve some bill. This though gives the Senate veto power over bills. Moreover, relative to the House, the Senate over-represents rural interests. Think here of the fact that South Dakota has the same number of Senators as New York or California. Farmers can lobby senators from rural states for price supports that enhance the competitiveness of heavily mechanized American agriculture in the global economy. And this issue of agricultural support, not only in the United States but also in other developed economies like those of Japan and Europe, has played an important role in impeding progress on big, multilateral trade deals that are negotiated within the broader World Trade Organization or WTO framework over the last decade or so. Basically, multilateral -- big multilateral trade deals negotiated under the WTO have been dead over the last decade. And one of the principle reasons is because of agricultural interests in the United States. They have special institutional influence given how power is allocated within the Senate. So historically, one of the most important institutional changes in the United States, on trade policy, occurred in 1934. And this really helped to activate widespread support in the United States for free trade, for a more open trade policy with lowered barriers to trade after 1945. Critical change, once again, critical change in 1934 paves the way for an open trade policy after 1945. This institution, the RTAA, the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act, whose modern day equivalent is something called Fast Track Authority, which we're going to talk about in a little bit, helped activate American sponsorship of open global markets. So in the Reciprocal Trade Agreement Act of 1934, Congress delegated its constitutional right to regulate international trade to the president for a fixed interval of time. During this period of time, the president was authorized to negotiate trade deals with other countries, in which trade concessions could be offered on a reciprocal basis. In other words, the president could offer tariff cuts to some country if that country also offered tariff cuts that gave American firms better access to that foreign market. Because this power was ceded to the president temporarily, the president had an incentive to follow the intent of Congress. If the president failed to secure tariff concessions for American business interests, then Congress could fail to extend this authority when it came up for renewal. So if you remember back to our discussion on the constitutional authority of Congress and the president relative to foreign policy, you'll remember that the Constitution grants Congress the right to regulate international commerce. So why would Congress surrender this authority? In part, during the Great Depression, Congress recognized its dysfunction with respect to making trade policy. This dysfunction stemmed largely from the differences in constituency size faced by members of Congress and the president. Remember that officials are more likely to have interests that diverge or move away from the political center or the median of the country, if they represent small constituencies. When it comes to trade policy, congressional officials are more likely to have a small number of industries concentrated in their districts. This means that their districts will rely on these industries for economic activity, and elected officials will have an incentive to support policies that promote these industries. So for example, the textile industry is concentrated in Southeastern states like South Carolina. Thus, we should expect that congressional officials from South Carolina are more likely to support tariffs on textiles. Now, alternatively, the president represents a national constituency. Thus, he or she has to balance the interests of a relatively small number of textile workers in South Carolina against the interests of consumers nationally. Or, when it comes to negotiating a trade deal with China, the president has to balance the interests of the textile industry in South Carolina, relative to say, the financial sector in New York City. If American banks can get better access to China through concessions on textiles, then President Obama might make that deal. In short, the president is more likely to favor free trade than members of Congress. So this difference in political preferences creates a problem when making trade policy. Members of Congress can engage in something called logrolling. What's logrolling? This is where members of Congress trade support for polices that benefit their district with other congressional officials for policies that benefit their districts. And the classic case of this is the Smoot-Hawley Tariff that we discussed earlier in the semester. So Herbert Hoover comes to office in 1929, supporting new tariffs on agricultural products. He asked Congress to review these tariff policies. Congress then chooses to revisit tariffs, essentially on all products produced in the United States, not just on agriculture. And here's the logrolling dynamic. Senators from Iowa got vote support for this massive tariff bill from senators in Pennsylvania on corn tariffs by supporting their interests in higher tariffs on steel. So Pennsylvania senator votes for corn tariffs, and the Iowa senator votes for steel tariffs. This is logrolling, but the net result of this was that Congress pushed tariffs up on a huge range of products, which then insulated the American economy from the international economy, and then provoked retaliatory tariffs in return. So FDR then reacts to this challenge by securing the Reciprocal Trade Agreement Act in 1934. Congress delegates its capacity to set tariffs to the president to avoid this logrolling problem. And FDR was aided by democratic support for tariff cuts, and significant democratic majorities at the time. Now, the contemporary equivalent of this delegation is something called "fast" "track authority." With fast track authority, Congress votes to extend to the President the right to negotiate trade pacts with other countries. Congress simultaneously promises an up or down ratification vote on the trade treaty. This authority is supposed to strengthen the president's hand when making trade deals because it helps to reassure foreigners that the United State or Congress will not insist on another round of concessions, i.e., through congressional amendments, after a trade pact has already been reached. Now, fast track authority expired in 2007 and has yet to be renewed. This accounts partially for the lack of progress on multilateral trade liberalization in the last six or seven years. 