 Now we want to move from talking about how domestic institutions shape trade policy, to talking about how international organization helped to foster globalization. In the aftermath of World War II the United States has led the effort to construct a series of international organizations that would support the reduction of trade barriers and trade induced economic growth. This effort was pushed forward through the Bretton Woods Economic Summit of 1944 in which the plans for the WTO, the IMF, and the World Bank were first launched. The impetus for this vision rested on multiple challenges that Western leaders faced at the time. They recognized how the resort to protectionism and currency wars had dramatically cut economic growth during the Great Depression by essentially closing off the global economy. Thus, they viewed these institutions as a means to prevent future economic collapse. They also wanted to support free trade and globalization as a bulwark against communism. Open markets in the United States and Western Europe could provide an economic incentive to stay aligned with the West in the larger political struggle against communism in the Soviet Union. Finally, things like the RTAA and a Republican conversion to free trade -- this was prompted by the war-induced elimination of industrial capacity in Europe and economic competition -- all turned the domestic politics of trade policy in the United States. It was much easier to build a coalition of domestic support for free trade in the United States after World War II than it was during the 1920s. So what was the GATT? The GATT was a multilateral organization designed to support the reduction of trade barriers on a reciprocal basis among states. This means that there was an expectation among states that any concession or tariff cut would prompt some set of tariff cuts by another country in return, so no one would have to do these things unilaterally. It provided a series of rules or principles that guided multilateral bargaining efforts called negotiating rounds during the Cold War. Pushed by the United States the GATT proved to be fairly successful. Many studies have shown that membership in the GATT boosted a country's aggregate trade flows during the Cold War. The GATT faced a significant problem, though, it facilitated the construction of trade deals among the countries to cut tariffs, sure. However, it did not provide a mechanism to adjudicate trade disputes among its members, when one country accused another of violating its obligations by withdrawing its concessions. Thus, states could secure better access to another country's markets through the GATT, and then renege, right, temporarily re-impose new tariffs with limited penalties. The GATT rules expected that countries would handle these trade disputes on a bilateral basis, basically, on their own, right, which was often highly inefficient. So in 1995 the GATT became the World Trade Organization, the WTO. There is a key substantive difference between the two organizations. The WTO has an institutionalized enforcement tool called the "dispute resolution mechanism." This dispute resolution mechanism acts as a judicial means to settle trade policy conflicts among the members of the WTO. It is designed to uphold existing trade concessions by deterring violations of those agreements. Essentially it creates a process whereby a judicial panel is empowered to hear legal suit by one country against another. It also includes an appeals process. If a defendant is found guilty of violating its previous trade policy agreements, the judicial panel determines the size of the economic injury to the plaintiff country and then empowers that plaintiff country to impose retaliatory tariffs against the offending country. In this way the enforcement capacity of the WTO pushes states to honor their international trade agreements through the threat of economic punishment if they rescind on their promises. Moreover, the judicial panel gives the plaintiff a lot of autonomy in choosing where to impose economic pain on the defendants. They can punish sectors with the most political clout, and this is interesting. For example, a group of European countries filed a dispute with the WTO against the Bush Administration in the United States on steel tariffs early in his Presidency. The Europeans threatened to impose tariffs on orange juice if they won the ruling on steel. Now why would they impose tariffs on orange juice? Think back to the Presidential Election of 2000, Bush's electoral victory depended on a narrow vote margin, a narrow win in Florida, as a brief means of conclusion, so they impose a tariff on orange juice so that the Bush Administration incurs costs in their electoral support in Florida and the next time there's an election, might lose a close election because they lose Florida. So, as a brief means of conclusion, it is fair to say that the broader multilateral effort within the WTO to further trade liberalization has been relatively stunted during the past decade. The dispute resolution mechanism has been effective in preserving existing obligations, heightening trade and investment among its members. However, resistance to new trade liberalization by big countries, like the United States and Europe, Japan, even China, has hindered new progress. The success of the APAC, the recent Summit this week, suggests that we might be entering a new transition period that could again speed-up globalization and intensify the competition associated with it. 