 ﻿1 This module provides another transition in the content for the course. The prior six modules focused on the role played by military force in U.S. foreign policy. We explored the connections among organized violence and political order, the causes of war, great power war and their peace settlements, civil war, nuclear weapons and terrorism. The next three modules discuss three prominent political sources of order among states and international politics including the presence of hegemony, democracy within states and international organizations like the United Nations and NATO, or the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. These conversations will allows us to look at how the United States has shaped the larger political order in this global system during the 20th century. This module is comprised of five segments. The first returns to a concept, namely the U.S. as an indispensable nation, that we discussed at the start of class when we read President Obama's West Point speech. We present something called 'hegemonic stability theory' as a way to understand related claims that stable political and economic systems in international relations require leadership from dominant states like that offered by the United States since 1945. The second segment discusses power transition theory, which invokes the logic of the commitment problem again to discuss how the rise and fall of leading great power states like Great Britain, Germany, the United States, and China, can increase the risks of great power war and destabilize international politics. The third segment draws on these discussions of hegemonic stability theory and power transition theory to look at contemporary relations between China and the United States. It briefly overviews the Chinese economic miracle, identifies some of the sources of Chinese grand strategy, discusses how the political status of Taiwan complicates relations between China and the United States, and considers how some powerful sources of common interest between the two super powers might stabilize global politics indefinitely. In the fourth segment we show an interview with professor Avery Goldstein, who discusses contemporary U.S./China relations. And finally, in the fifth segment, we discuss the Ying reading that was assigned for this module. 