 We're gonna take another cut at understanding the unique nature of the current international order, one in which the United States enjoys a significant amount of military and economic advantage over its potential competitors. We're going to present something called hegemonic stability theory to understand some of the larger benefits for the entire international system that are provided by American leadership. This discussion will help to theoretically ground the policy discussions that we've had referring to the United States as the indispensable nation in the world. A concept that we began discussing when we first reviewed President Obama's West Point speech at the beginning of the course. So I want to start this discussion by reviewing this concept of the United States as an indispensable nation. Indispensability here refers to something that is absolutely necessary. When talking about global politics this really implies that the larger international political system, has come to depend on the United States. And so let's us give you a few examples of this possibility. When ISIS begins to make significant territorial gains in Iraq and Syria, the pro, their progress was really only halted when the United States began a new wave of air strikes that targeted ISIS and at the same time, assembled a broad multi-national coalition that was also willing to confront ISIS. So, a number of countries sat on the sidelines and waited for the U.S. to act. Similarly, an Iranian nuclear weapons program that could Po, potentially destabilize the Middle East, threatening both Israel and the United States, and what's going on? It's the United States that has taken the lead in trying to construct a diplomatic solution to this crisis. A solution, then, might prevent Iran from getting nuclear weapons for at least the next decade. But all of this, these two examples, really imply the following. When the world has a problem that no one else can solve, there is often an expectation. In which other countries look first to the United States to see how it will act, whether it can first provide a solution. Now what Rod just talked about with respect to the Saudis in creating this multinational force, that's going to intervene in Yemen, there is some doubt about America's resolve in capacity. To solve the problem with respect to Iran, because the United States has mixed motives here. We want to cut into, Saudi Arabia realizes that the United States wants to cut a deal with Iran over its nuclear weapons program, but that might be undermining America's ability to contain Iran's influence, say in Syria and in Lebanon and in Yemen. So these larger problems though open up a larger set of questions. Is American leadership necessary? Or even beneficial for the international system. And, why does the United States choose to lead? So we can provide one set of answers to these questions by introducing something called hegemonic stability theory. When you hear the term hegemony, think leadership or dominance. So let me say that again, when you hear the term hegemony, think leadership or dominance. In international politics, this refers to the concentration of some economic and military power in one state. So, when we have a hegemony in international politics, we have the concentration of economic and military power in one state. When it's defeat, when economic and military power is diffused among multiple states, four or five poles or great powers, then we don't have a hegemonic system. So, we might think about international politics since 1945 as one in which the United States as a hegemon, presided over this system. This concentration of power has often been associated with two critical outcomes. More commercial flows, like trade among states, that's the first one. And hegemonic dominance has also been associated with interstate peace. So hegemonic stability theory implies that American dominance has helped to foster more globalization since 1945, and it has helped to foster more peace generally in the international system since 1945. Hegemonic stability theory also implies the following. If economic and or military power is de-concentrated or spread out in the system among many powers, then the global system is likely to have less trade or globalization and were likely to see more conflict or tensions among the great powers. The interwar period after World War One is often held up as an example of these destabilizing dynamics. There were many powerful states in Europe once Germany and the Soviet Union had recovered from World War One. The potential hegemon in the system, the United States, opted to withdraw from European politics. The net result of this equalization, a power among multiple countries, was a global, economic and military contest. Total war on all fro -- on all fronts in World War II, that imposed really decades of costs on the broader global population. So, one variant of Hegemonic Stability Theory relies heavily on the collective action problem that we discussed earlier in the context of societal lobbying on foreign policy. This theory, hegemonic stability theory, is used to generate propositions, hegemonic stability theory and collective goods theory is used to generate propositions about the conditions under which public goods are supplied in international politics. So HST argues that the presence of a hegemon, or a country like the United States is necessary to provide public goods. And it's here where you can begin to see the parallel behind hegemonic stability theory and discussions of the United States as the indispensable nation in the world. So remember what public goods are, public goods are things like national defense, clear air. They're often, though, under supplied, because of something called the free rider problem. It is costly to exclude people from consuming these goods. National defense and free air, once they are supplied or produced. So people tend to free ride, remember free ride is not contributing or paying for the public good. People tend to free ride on the contributions of others. However here's the problem, if everyone free rides on the contributions of others to provide public goods like national defense or clean air, then no one contributes to the public good. And a public policy, then, I mean, I think we can agree that we have an interest in securing America's borders from external threats. But a public policy that everyone might have an interest in seeing implemented does not come to fruition because nobody is making contributions to the payments associated with the public good. They're just trying to free ride on everybody else. So public goods tend to be under-supplied if you rely on markets to supply them. So how do we solve this free rider problem? It's often solved through the coercive power of the state or simply a government. In the United States, the, the Government secures the revenues to pay for the military, to build and maintain roads and to support an impartial legal infrastructure that settles disputes among individuals. The Government does all this, by collecting taxes from society. Under the threat of imprisonment for noncompliance, i.e. not paying your taxes. Here's the problem though, what happens when we move to the international system or the international realm of politics? When there isn't a global state or some supranational authority over all states, over all governments like the United States, that's capable of enforcing contributions by individual states to some public good. Well there's another way that the free-rider problem can be solved that we did not talk about in our prior discussion. In this secondary solution, a large actor pays the cost of providing the public good on its own. Because the benefits it receives are sufficient compensation to offset those costs. This supply by a single large actor is the focus of Hegemonic stability theory. And the argument is that the presence of a large powerful actor in global politics helps to solve this global public goods problem. Because the hegemon chooses just to take on the cost of providing the public goods on its own. So, after 1945, the United States had an interest in seeing an open global economy, because it was gonna benefit. All this global trade was going to make exporters and businesses in the United States, it was gonna increase their profits. So, the United States helped to open the broader global economy, because it benefited America's citizens. So let me give you a few examples of these global public goods. The first one which has been the focus of hegemonic stability theory is a stable and open international economy. A second one perhaps more relevant to the current period might be an atmosphere with lower levels of carbon dioxide. And a third example of a global public good might be the protection of global shipping lanes so that commerce can flourish and move freely through the ocean. Okay, so let's talk about Hegemonic stability theory in the context of the global economy. Its central proposition, is that the concentration of economic capacity or power in one state increases the likelihood that the global economic system will be open. So under this condition, an open global economy is synonymous with higher levels of international trade which then increase economic growth for all the states that participate in this global economy. So why do we have this link between economic dominance of one state and economic growth for all? Because the Hegemon chooses to provide a series of public goods that help the global economy to flourish. And the Hegemon chooses to provide these things on its own out of economic self interests. So let me talk about some examples of these public goods. The first is called a market for distressed goods. This means that a hegemon will open its domestic market to imports in a time of economic crisis. When economies slow down, consumers buy fewer goods, and firms go out of business. Governments often try to offset this domestic slowdown by encouraging domestic manufacturers and businesses to market or sell their products abroad, to export more. This is difficult, though, if other governments are also facing these economic crises and they choose to close their economies to new imports, say by throwing up tariff barriers. Well in the most recent global crisis of 1997 and 2008, the United States didn't do that. It maintained its role essentially as a consumer of last resort in the global economy. Keeping American markets open to foreign exports, which then allowed other economies to recover to stimulate economic growth by selling goods or exporting to the American consumers. The United States did this by keeping tariff barriers low or nonexistent. This is not what happened in the interwar period. When the economic, when the economic crisis hit in 1929 the United States pushed up tariff barriers. Forced everyone else around the world to do the same, which drove down global trade significantly. So more broadly, this American leadership has been critical to global economic growth since 1945. Many countries, particularly those in East Asia, have relied on something called an export oriented economic strategy to generate jobs and wealth. This simply means that they generated growth by selling more goods and services to people in other countries than buying goods and services from people in those countries. So how could they do this? Run a trade surplus. They could do this because the largest consumer market in the world, mainly that of the United States has remained open for business during this period. Now one of the things we're going to talk about is this is one of the challenges, facing Chinese leaders today and it has implications for the contemporary relationship between China and the United States. China has long relied on the American consumer to generate growth, but now they're in the midst of having to reorient their domestic economy. They need to become less dependent on American consumers and more dependent on Chinese consumers. But that itself is gonna necessitate some risks going on within China, because saving patterns among Chinese consumers, Chinese consumers save a lot more than they do in the United States. And so it's unclear whether the Chinese consumer is ready to do what the U.S. consumer does. Which is basically, save no money and buy lots, lots of stuff, which also helped to generate growth in China. A second key public good is simply the provision of a currency in, for global markets that everyone trusts to retain its value, to serve as the means of exchange in international markets. Now, the U.S. dollar has served this role since at least the end of World War II. Later in the semester, we will talk about the provision of this public good as a function of the quality of American monetary policy, the ability of our government to control budget deficits, and the ability of our central bank to control inflation. Now a third key public good is simply the provision of emergency credit in financial crises. The federal reserve or our nation's central bank supplied this public good during the recent crisis in 2008. Extraordinary measures on the part of the fed helped to bail out American banks which in turn helps to save large banks in Asia and Europe. Because European banks had lent so much money to American banks, the collapse of American banks would have meant the collapse of European banks. So in this way the fed's actions in 2008 helped to stabilize the larger global financial system and banks around the world. Finally, hegemons like the United States and Great Britain also help international trade to flourish by protecting global shipping lanes. They do this with powerful navies that possess the capacity to confront pirates and ensure that other navies do not take over these global shipping lanes. And then restrict movement and trade through them. 