 So now let's talk about, these dynamics. Power transition theory, and how it shapes relations between China and the United States. We're going to do this in the next fifteen minutes or twenty minutes. The next slide provides a couple of pictures. I'm sure Rob, we don't have time for him to make fun of me. >> Cargo shorts. >> Cargo shorts. >> Cargo shorts are so functional, right? >> We don't have time for your lecture on cargo shorts. >> I can't get -- Notice what I have. I am sweating, it's hot there, it's the middle of August what do I got in my pockets? Water. >> What's with the- >> Water. >> Sweatshirt in the middle of August? >> Well, that was the only Texas shirt I had with me, I thought I'd need it in the morning, so I just thought I'd put it on. So I could do a hook 'em sign on the top of the Great Wall. So this next slide gives you a couple of pictures. The first is the picture on the left and the picture on the right, though, is designed to illustrate some of the deeper challenges associated with China's rise. Both inside of China and to the broader international system. This was a picture taken about 20 floors up in an office. Complex in Beijing, on a typical August day. The haze in the sky is pollution, and you can see how it limits visibility. My bet there was about, it was maybe about a one mile of visibility in Beijing that day. Given that Beijing's residents, are reminded of this everyday, so are it's leading politicians, this is a real public health hazard. And it has negative externalities not only for people living inside of China but outside of China as well, when we start thinking about global CO2 levels. These challenges though for dealing with CO2 levels in China, as they are in the United States. Right, because cutting greenhouse gases likely means raising the cost of economic activity which means diminished economic growth. And politicians don't like to make those decisions in China or in the United States. And so, China, a deal between China and the United States really stands at the heart of long-term global warming. The next slide gives you some sense of how, and we're going to transition here and I first I wanna talk about Chinese economic growth. And remember economic growth, stands behind often concerns about power transition theory because economic capacity is viewed as a prerequisite for military capacity. So the next slide, gives you some sense of how believable -- unbelievable, sorry, this period of economic growth has been in China over the last 35 years. Make no mistake about it, since the period of economic reform began in 1978, this set of policies, which has moved China far away from a Communist system, has literally lifted millions, I'm sorry, hundreds of millions of people out of poverty. I dare say that the history of humankind has never seen a similar period of rapid and widespread positive economic change. The figures on the bottom of the slide give you some sense of how dramatic this growth has been in China. While growth in the United States has hovered, say between negative terms during the great recession of 2008 to up to about 4.5% over this period. The Chinese economy has generally expanded by between 7 and 11 percentage points since 1978. The entire Chinese economy, measured by gross domestic product, or GDP, is still significantly smaller than the United States but it is likely to overtake the United States fairly soon, if current trajectories are continued. China accomplished this economic miracle by pursuing policies, that were more in line with American-style capitalism. The onset of the reform period involved the devolution of authority, to regulate economic activity from the capital in Beijing, to special economic zones in regions of the country. This delegation of regulatory capacity to local branches of government. Fostered competition among these local branches of governments, and they competed, by trying to secure foreign direct investment. So local governments, this competition occurred in the form of reducing regulations to foreigners that were willing to invest in their city, or in their city or in their county. So these, this government competition for ever lower regulations showed up as lower taxes, cheap land, or cheap rent and improved local infrastructure. So in this way the devolution of power away from Beijing fostered competition among governments. And we can see this even in the United States in the same way that the governor of Texas, might compete with the governor of California, by offering lower taxes to a company like Tesla, to secure their investment here. They would offer the potential to create new production plans, and new jobs. Incidentally, if you are following the controversy over the new light -- the new law on religious rights in Indiana, there's been a business response and governors from surrounding states have said, this new law is bad for business. So, if businesses want to move to Indiana or to, say, Maryland, we're open. The idea here is fostering competition, among local governments. That regulate economy. This competition drives down regulatory burdens, and fosters economic growth. This is what, we see this among the states in the United States. This was critical to Chinese economic growth beginning in the late 1970's. So during this period of reform, China has become less Communist. Let me reinforce this point. China has become more capitalist, and less communist. And here I wanna take a step back and point out that the term communism, refers to the scope of government regulation over economic activity. It generally means the relative absence of privately held property, and the allocation of scarce resources, in an economy through bureaucratic direction, rather than competitive markets. So, a government tells a firm, you're gonna produce military hardware. You're gonna produce tanks. You're gonna produce cars. That's what happens under communism. Obviously that's not what happens in the United States. President Obama doesn't tell Dell what it should be producing. So this transition to less communism in China, though, does not mean that China has necessarily opened up politically, it's still an authoritarian regime. In public debates in the United States the meaning, though, of the term Communism often mistakenly refers to government control of both political and economic activity. Instead, Communism is really about government control of economic activity. So what does all this mean? If we're thinking about contemporary China. You should think of China as still an authoritarian political regime that's run by a Communist party that's overseeing an increasingly capitalist economy, in which the degree of government regulation of economic transactions is falling. This period of economic reform has also ushered in a fairly conciliatory grand strategy on the part of the Chinese Government. Since 1979 Chinese grand strategy has been dictated by the need to maintain domestic political stability during a time of unprecedented economic and social change. Just as China is getting wealthier, income inequality is exploding. This means that the gap between the rich and the poor is increasing rapidly. China has gone from being the most, from being the most equal society in the world to being one of the most unequal societies in the world in terms of the distribution of income or wealth. Think back to our discussion about the economic sources of civil war. Economic, I'm sorry, income inequality was high on that list as a cause of civil war. So these concerns about the need to preserve economic development and maintain job creation in the cities, as more people move from rural areas in China to take advantage of these new opportunities have pushed the Chinese government to settle, and to alter their foreign policy. So what the Chinese government has done is, settle a number of outstanding territorial disputes and join international organizations like the World Trade Organization to reassure the world that this economic growth is not going to usher in a potentially destabilizing or conflict-prone period of transition. In this way, the Chinese government has sought to maintain international peace and open access to global consumer markets, like that in the United States, so as not to derail domestic development. Chinese leaders are focused first on a series of domestic challenges. Right? Their foreign policy is not directed right now towards territorial expansion or aggressively challenging American interests around the world. There is a transition or a change in Chinese foreign policy in about the middle of the 1990's. In the early 1990's they were much more aggressive and expanse, expansive with respect to Taiwan. But what they learned was that the United States, because of these concerns about the growth -- potential growth of Chinese power and influence, the United States in the middle 1900s worked aggressively to counter Chinese influence and the lesson for the Chinese leadership was "we're not ready to provoke American" "tough responses," and so instead we've got a transition in Chinese grand strategy in the middle 1990s when they stopped, where they pulled back from taking a hard line on Taiwan. And they began to join a series of international organizations but all of this was designed to reassure the world that they were happy with the larger world order or the larger international political status quo that existed then, why, the leadership wants peace to implement, to have the space to implement this period of massive economic reform while hopefully preserving internal political stability. Now the third key component of contemporary relations between China and the United States that I would like to discuss is the current status of Taiwan. While many scholars and policy makers believe that the world is in a new era of great power peace, they simultaneously point to Taiwan as the one potential flash point that could destabilize great power relations. Taiwan exists in a weird, ambiguous political status in which it is effectively an independent democratic country that is also a quasi-ally of the United States. However, very few countries in the world recognize Taiwan as an independent political entity, including the United States. We do not have an official ambassador to Taiwan. And Taiwan is not a member of the United Nations. This odd status is an artifact of the currently unresolved Chinese civil war that ended in 1949 with the Nationalist government of China fleeing to Taiwan to set up a rival government there. If you go back to our lectures on the Cold War, Rob talked about this development, the loss of the nationalists and the Chinese civil war is a big loss for the United States in the early stage of the Cold War. The US did not recognize the new communist regime in Beijing and instead recognized the nationalist government in Taiwan as the rightful government over all of China. Then when the Korean War breaks out, this status was given a new push, because United States opted to develop strong ties with the national government in Taiwan because it wanted its support to fight the Communists in Korea, and this policy then continued for the first couple of decades during the Cold War. Nixon changes this in the early 1970's. He senses an opportunity created by an emerging split between China and the Soviet Union in the late 1960's. So, what he chooses to do is, he opts to improve relations with the mainland, with China, to limit Soviet influence in Asia. However the cost of this shift was a move by the United States away from strong support for Taiwan. Today, the source of contention between China and Taiwan is the ultimate political status of Taiwan. Is it a part of China, and if so, how much political independence should it have? The overriding interest of the United States on this issue is the preservation of peace. So to that end the United States has really maintained an ambiguity between the two sides that emerged after Nixon opens up the main land. So the United States pivots back and forth between the two sides. If it believes that either side is unilaterally trying to change the status quo. So over the last 20 years one frequent source of instability has been Taiwanese elections. Politicians, during the election season, have openly promoted formal declarations of political independence to secure domestic political support. These campaigns, though, have aroused concerns in Beijing that if elected, if they're elected those politicians will then follow through on that promise knowing that Beijing has already publicly committed to use military force against Taiwan if it declares independence. Now Beijing is worried that independence-supporting politicians, believe that the United States would have no choice but to support Taiwan given the long history of the relationship between the United States and Taiwan, United States couldn't abandon a democratic Taiwan if an autocratic China invaded it. Thus, you can see that the United States really plays a critical role in preserving the peace there. Tilting back and forth to either side if it looks like the other is trying to unilaterally alter the status quo. Now this relationship has stabilized significantly over the last ten years in large part due to learning on both sides. And a recognition by both governments that war would simply be too costly. These potential costs would be imposed through the loss of significant commerce between the two sides, including the loss of massive amounts of Taiwanese investment on the mainland. So just as China and Taiwan have developed strong economic ties, the same can be said for the current relationship between China and the United States. I wanna give you some sense of a really powerful sources of common -- complimentary interests between the two, two states. And think about that when you hear conversations about power transition theory or an emerging or potential war between China and the United States in the next 20 or 30 years. When you think about this trade, I think it's fair to say that it's mutually beneficial. The next slide give you some sense of these links. In 2013 the U.S. bought about $440 billion in goods and services from China. Now, China relies on these exports to generate economic growth. As I noted earlier, the period of economic reform has been motivated in large part by the need to secure foreign direct investment to fund massive expansions in industrial activity that could in turn create jobs in the cities in China, with exploding population growth. Now faced with massive amounts of internal migration from the countryside, the Chinese leadership is worried what these people will do if they get to the cities and they don't have a job. The concern is that jobless masses will then organize massive protests and destabilize the cities. In this way, the Chinese leadership believes that internal political stability rests heavily on securing expanding access to export markets. This leads us -- so China benefits from trade exports to the United States. This leads though to a brief explanation of how the United States also benefits from this economic relationship in which the American consumer helps to foster social stability in China, by shopping at Walmart. Yes, the United States has a huge trade deficit with China. This means that the United States buys more goods and services from China than it sells to them. Isn't that bad? Not necessarily. Because we need to ask how the United States pays for these products. The short answer is that China, particularly its central bank facilitates these exports from China to the United States, by lending the money to the United States to pay for them. These loans show up in the form of Chinese purchases of US treasury bonds, and Chinese purchases of mortgage backed securities. Chinese government is lending money to the U.S. government so that it can run budget deficits, and it's lending money to the American homeowners so they can buy houses. By lending money to the American government, the Chinese government enables it to run high-budget deficits, while cutting taxes on the American people. And this is really important after 9/11 as the U.S. government bolsters military spending, it fights two extended wars and managed to cut taxes at the same time. Where did this money come from? A huge chunk of it came from the Chinese. So thus, there are strong common interests between the two countries based on this mutually beneficial economic relationship that really helped to foster cooperation between the two sides. 