 Okay, So now I want to run an interview I conducted over Skype with Professor Avery Goldstein from the University of Pennsylvania. It was taped in the fall of 2014, and was prompted by a recent paper he wrote in foreign affairs about the growing risks of a political or military crisis over these maritime disputes in the South China Sea. In the portion that you will see, we will focus on the content of China's grand strategy today. Please pay particular attention to the domestic pressures that the Chinese government faces and how they influence its foreign policies. The rest of my questions can be found on your slides for today. So let's go ahead and roll that clip. And first, let me just thank you Avery for joining us today. I thought we might start by asking you to lay out kind of three central things that our students should know about contemporary China. >> Okay. Well first of all, thanks for inviting to participate in this session. What I would say is the first and most important thing people have to keep in mind that they probably don't think about when they think about China and China's rise is just how many really daunting problems that leadership in China faces at home as opposed to in terms of China's international relations. Most of those problems have to do with issues of economic development, growth in the economy, but also changing the balance in the economy between consumption and exports. But also quality of life issues. The terrible problems of air and water pollution and soil pollution that they face in China. And these quality of life issues are really political issues because the Chinese people have already begun to vent their happiness. So my guess is when the Chinese leader wakes up in the morning-- president Xi Jinping wakes up in the morning, he's not thinking about how can I establish China's regional dominance or how can I compete with the United States. But really, the first 25 items on his concerns for the day have to do with domestic problems that he faces and simply making the machine of China's political, economic, and social system operate. >> So how then do these challenges economic development, the environment, basic living standards--how do they stress or alter US-China relations? And how might they make things worse in the future? Because another reading that we'll talk about in lecture today is going to be a story about this power transition. Do we have a long term problem with China 30 or 40 years from now? How might these domestic problems factor into those larger debates? >> Right. So when China makes its decisions about foreign policy issues, the first priority is to think about what will the consequences be in terms of the domestic situation in China. So on the one hand, what they'd like to do is avoid unnecessary problems abroad. In other words, create an international context that is more favorable to China addressing its domestic problems. But sometimes, issues force themselves onto the agenda of foreign policy and they have to deal with them. Actions triggered by other states or international problems where China is expected to play a role on climate change or other issues having to do with humanitarian relief and whatnot. And when those kinds of issues come up, China is going to stand up for its interests. But it's also going to try to avoid taking steps that would, perhaps, exacerbate the conflicts that they could face. Or let me put it another way. The United States may have certain expectations about the role that China can play internationally. And certainly, in the Bush administration, Robert Zoellick had brought up this idea of China being a responsible stakeholder. And from the Chinese perspective, one of the concerns is that the expectations that the international community has and the United States has for China may be unrealistic. So for example, in terms of issues like climate change that hit in terms of economic burden for China maybe too severe if China has to commit to deep kinds of cuts in its emissions of green house gases and things like that. >> So what I'm hearing--one of the big themes that we've talked about, if you remember president Obama's West Point speech. We come back to it again and again, the idea of the US as an indispensable nation. So what I'm hearing from you is that that status is likely to remain unchanged because China just isn't ready to shoulder a lot of responsibilities that now fall on the United States. Is that a fair assessment? And how long do you think that might last? >> So I think it's true for the next decade, maybe two decades. That what China wants, if you want to put it this way. In terms of its role regionally and its relationship with the United States, is an adjustment. I don't think it's viewed really in terms of power transition but rather the idea that China is becoming more capable. And therefore, China feels that it's entitled to have a greater say in international institutions, on regional security issues. And more of an even playing field with the United States. And I think one of the problems is that it's not clear that the United States has yet figured out how it might adjust to China playing a larger role. Even if China is not going to play an equal role, compared to the United States, how willing is the United States to accommodate a greater role for China internationally as opposed to demanding that China simply accept more responsibilities and burdens without also having a greater say in international institutions and on regional security questions? >> So you just talked about how one of the challenges here, on the part of the United States, is thinking about how it might adjust to China. What do you think are the domestic constraints or how is American politics inhibiting or how might it constrain this adjustment that could facilitate some type of conciliation between the two? >> I think this is a huge issue in domestic American politics because every president, and every presidential candidate, and every congressman and senator, who pays attention to international affairs, routinely states that the United States is not only the greatest country in the world but the strongest country in the world, and it's determined to remain number one. And it becomes very difficult then for political leaders to talk about these issues, or perhaps, adjusting the relationship between what has been the unparalleled power of the United States in the Asia Pacific region, and arising China and some willingness to make adjustments in terms of the Western Pacific in particular, not just being an area where the United States can operate as it sees fit and more or less dictates the security circumstances. But perhaps, have to accommodate not only the interests but the power of rising Chinese military. >> So let's talk a little bit about the-- the students read your recent piece in foreign affairs. And the piece provides a warning about the potential for crisis instability between the United States and China. I was wondering-- aren't they strong? If we think about this in terms of nuclear weapons, if we think in terms of this about the strong economic interests between the two. Aren't there structural things in place that would limit escalation between the two and really help to contain conflict? >> Right. I think there are these constraints. The mutual economic interests that they share. The existence of nuclear weapons which means nobody is going to consciously choose to go to war that could become a nuclear war. I think the concern is even if those constraints on the situation make it less likely than would otherwise be the case for a crisis to escalate to war, the consequences of a war are so huge that even a smaller probability that such crises could escalate to the use of military force is really something concerning and that really both analysts and policy makers should want to pay attention to. Other words, I'm not saying and I wasn't suggesting in that article that the escalation of a crisis to military conflict is likely. What I was trying to emphasize is how it might be possible, why it might be possible. And because the consequences would be so devastating that it deserves more attention than it has been getting. >> So I want to ask now a question about Chinese domestic politics. And we have talked a little bit about this. What is the role of nationalism in China? How does this interact with the institutions there? And how might nationalism play a role in a potential crisis situation between the two countries? >> It's a huge problem. And maybe I've answered every question you asked because that's a huge problem. And there are really a lot of problems for the Chinese leaders, and they spill over into China's international relations. Nationalism is--you know in United States we don't talk about nationalism. We say patriotism but it's the same thing actually. And so what you have in China is on the one hand, the leftover effects of history where China was exploited frankly in the 19th and early 20th century by a variety of foreign powers that meant when the revolution took place in China, it was largely driven by this nationalistic aspiration for China to stand up to meddling by foreign powers and exploitation by foreign powers. But on top of that has been layered the nationalist rhetoric that the communist party has embraced after it came to power in 1949. And especially as China in the reform period has become economically so successful. Second large economy in the world. And as its military has begun to modernize, the expectation has taken root among nationalistic or patriotic Chinese that its leadership no longer has an excuse not to stand up for China's interests when they bump up against other countries' interests on the world's stage. Combine that with the rise and spread of new media, the internet, and social media in China which provides an opportunity for people, average citizens in China, to express nationalist outrage over certain issues. Sometimes it spills over into street demonstrations. And that presents the leadership in China with a real tough set of choices that they have to make during even not really crises but any sorts of confrontation or disputes they may have with other countries. They have to decide how heavily should they try to sensor discussion of these foreign policy issues that may be driven by this nationalist sentiment among the Chinese people. If they're not going to limit it, if they allow the discussion to go on, does that tie the government's hands and its ability to compromise at times when they might want to compromise, say, with the United States or with Japan over some of these disputes? But feel as so if they compromise it will damage the credibility of the leadership or the legitimacy in the eyes of the Chinese people that this is a leadership that can stand up for China's interests. So it may in fact constrain the ability of the leadership to make the foreign policy choices they would want to make. But one last point that is an important one. Because you mentioned authoritarian institutions. It is an authoritarian regime. When it wants to, it can prevent demonstrations. It can control the kinds of posts that are put up on social media, the kinds of discussions that take place on blogs in China, et cetera. If it chooses to do so, it's a costly choice. This is a point that a scholar from Yale, Jessica Weiss, has made in some of her recent writings. It's a costly choice for the leadership and a risky one because it runs the risk of being seen as squashing patriotism or nationalism within China. But it is something that they can do if they want to do it. Now and so, if you're the United States or if you're Japan. In dealing with China, you have to walk a fine line and ask yourself, 'Is the Chinese leadership using this claim about having their hands tied and being constrained by nationalist' opinion?' Or 'Is the Chinese leadership using that as a negotiating ploy in order to try to get a better deal from the other side?' And so that complicates China's ability to manage its foreign policy with other countries. And it complicates the ability of other countries to figure out exactly what kind of deal they can strike with the Chinese when they want to solve disputes. >> Alright. I just want to reinforce a few things here from the interview. Note the domestic challenges that China faces today. They are enormous. Goldstein argues that China's leaders focus on them rather than confronting the United States around the world. This possibility calls him question whether China wants to remake the larger world. The implication is that the current leadership doesn't want to take on the risks of an increasingly ambitious foreign policy because it could risk destabilizing the domestic political system. Note that you can see a similar perspective in your reading today that emphasizes China's stake in the current global system because its economic growth has rested on integration with an open trading system. Goldstein reinforces this argument by noting that China wants some adjustment and accommodation from the United States within the current system, but it's not ready to assume more responsibility relative to United States with respect to managing the system. Finally, I also want you to recognize that even though China is an authoritarian system, domestic politics and domestic public opinion still shape Chinese foreign policy. Goldstein discusses this in the content of nationalism or what we refer to here as patriotism in United States. Even though it possesses the tools to repress dissidence and limit public displays of political opposition. The Chinese government still needs to be careful when doing this. It can have an uneasy relationship with nationalist pressures depending on them to prevent political instability at home but also weary of catering to those pressures in a way that pushes the government to adopt a more confrontational foreign policy line. Say, over the China Sea or Taiwan. In short, public opinion matters in China. And it shapes the contemporary relationship between China and the United States. 