 So now I want to spend a few minutes talking about the reading that was assigned for today. As I noted, it contains some similarities with the arguments that Goldstein made. While it focuses less on domestic politics inside China as a force for stability. It emphasizes China's relative satisfaction with the current international order. We assigned it because of its examination of the triangular relationship among China, Russia, and the United States. It challenges prevailing views that closer relations between China and Russia might necessarily threaten the United States. So here's a couple of points to take away from the reading. First, this essay offers a view of China's grand strategy that challenges the very foundations of power transition theory. China's leaders are trying to convince the rest of the world that its rise is not threatening to the rest of the world. Particularly to the United States. It has benefited from the open trading system. Its economic development depends on access to the global economy and American markets. Consequently, China doesn't have any interests in over turning this broader global status quo. So the next time you hear someone warning about China's rise, think about this article and ask yourself, 'What do they have to gain from going to war with the United States?' 'What is the alternative international system that China might be pursuing or trying to implement?' Relatedly, the article implies that China is trying to change the rules associated with traditional balance of power politics. Or rather, it's not playing by them at all. In this old system of rules, great powers balanced or aligned against any concentration of military power in the system. Given that the United States is the strongest military and economic power in the world today, those old rules imply that an alliance between China and Russia could offset and limit America's ability to project power on the world and threaten other countries. In short, the balance of power view of the world suggested that China has an interest in forming an alliance with Russia. However, this article argues that the Chinese government doesn't want to do that at all. It doesn't see the world in those terms. In zero sum terms. Instead, it has common interests with both the United States and Russia. And it sees these economic ties as a way to further China's own political and economic development. China doesn't see any need to construct a formal alliance with Russia. And the Chinese government is also very conscious of reassuring the world about its support for the existing system. 