 We're gonna start off today for lecture with a discussion of the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center in New York City and on the Pentagon in Washington, D.C. on September 11, 2001. Before we get into our remarks about the political legacies of this event, we want to show a video that provides an overview of what happened that day. And I've shown this video in my classes many times before, mostly because the event happened nearly 15 years ago and most of you were too young to remember this day, at least directly. And what I've told from students after showing this video is that many students have actually never really seen. Images of the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon. So it is something that I think is, is useful pedagogically for the course. And so, let's roll that video and then we'll come back. >> Today, jury selection begins in a critical phase of the trial of Andrea Yates, accused of drowning her five children. Plus, superstar Michael Jordan in the news. The strongest words yet from Jordan, that he will be back. Good morning, America. I'm Charles Gibson. >> I'm Diane Sawyer and it's Tuesday, September 11, 2001. Michael may be back. He's saying that tendonitis We wanna tell you what we know, as we know it, but we just got a report in, that there has been some sort of explosion at the World Trade Center, in New York City. One report said, and we can't confirm any of this, that a plane may have hit one of the two towers of the World Trade Center. But again, you're seeing the live pictures here. We have no further details in that. We don't know anything about what they have concluded happened there this morning. >> ABC's Don Dahler, who is on the scene. Don, just give me some description again of what you're, what you can see now. >> It appears that the, there is more and more fire and smoke enveloping the very top of the building and as fire crews are descending on this area. It, it does not appear that there's any kind of a, an effort up there yet. Now remember, oh, my God! >> Oh, my God! >> Oh, my God. >> That looks like a second plane. >> Dear lord. >> I did not see a plane go in. That, that just exploded. >> We just saw another plane coming in from the side. So this looks like it is some sort of a concerted effort To attack the World Trade Center that is underway. >> Today, we have had a national tragedy. Two airplanes have crashed into the World Trade Center in an apparent terrorist attack on our country. >> That is the courtyard of the Pentagon. The Pentagon is indeed exactly what its described just on the other side of the Potomac River from the Capitol. And there you see fires burning in the courtyard of the, of the Pentagon confirming what we had, what we've been told of almost immediately by eyewitnesses. >> The Pentagon itself has caved in from the top. There is much fire coming out of the windows it looks like something from World War II, Peter. >> A huge explosion now raining debris on all of us. We'd better get out of the way! >> Watch out! >> Let's go to the trade tower again. Because we now have a, what do we have? We don't, I would, maybe that something fell off the building. Peter, it's Don Dahler, and I'm four blocks north of the World Trade Center. The second building that was hit by the plane has just completely collapsed. It started with a gigantic rumble. Folded in on itself and collapsed in a huge plume of smoke and dust. >> Get out of here. >> We are talking about massive casualties here at the moment and we have. Whew. >> And I'm just gonna add to the chaos and the trauma of the day by saying, that a large plane has now crashed about 80 miles southeast of Pittsburgh. >> Peter, it crashed in an open field. All that's, all that you really see there is a huge crater. You can't even see it very well from our vantage point, a huge black gaping hole as investigators are describing it. No survivors, Peter. >> Oh, my god. The second, the second tower. It's hard to put it into words. And anyone doesn't need to. >> Oh no! >> Oh God! >> Oh! >> Both those towers have now, have now, have now gone. The landscape of New York City has just been changed and one has to assume that thousands. Their lives had been extinguished. Good lord, it just. >> This scene on the steps of the Capitol building tonight just as the sun was going down was very, very moving. >> Okay, so for those of us who were adults or young adults at this time. This, this event was so surreal. I, I still remember, and I think anybody who was especially saw it or, or was cognizant of it at the, at the time kinda live will always remember where they were. I was not teaching that day. I was here at UT, about five years in, as a professor here, and so I didn't teach until that night, and so I was at the gym, on a treadmill, watching these TV screens. And the, the morning shows were on, and I still remember sitting on there and watching this news story flash in and it was just like the, the, the clip you just saw. No one knew exactly what it was. Most, most of the news coverage thought it was some sort of accident at first and then, and I kept thinking at the time, it's like what kind of idiot flies a plane into that tower. Like by accident and then, there wasn't any coverage of how big the plane was at first, the first one. And then when you saw that second one come in, then you realized that it was an attack and that, that shock still was unreal. And, and then the day was just completely consumed by following it like minute by minute, hour by hour because, then, when the news came in on the Pentagon attack and then the other downed plane and, of course, the, the speculation was that that plane was headed toward Washington, DC, as well. And, and the White House, or something like that. And it was, it was, unreal, unreal. So, it is something that, even if you were too young to remember. And I know that my kids who are in college now, we shielded them. They were in second grade and, and kindergarten. And, and so we didn't really tell them a lot about it until later we kept them from the news and stuff and so it's important to know what this was and, and what it's like. And so that's why we show this, this video. Now to think about it in terms of the broader subject of terrorism and the terrorist attack, it's important to sort of systematically outline how the attacks on 9/11 changed the foreign policy environment in 2001 and has had these lasting effects to this day. First it, it must be stressed that prior to the 9/11 attack, terrorism was not really on the radar as a major threat against the United States. At that time in 2001, so this is what, 15 years ago, all, almost. The United States was still grappling with other threats. How to adapt to the end of the Cold War that occurred about a decade earlier. The U.S. faced a variety of threats and potential threats. Such as the rise of China, an increasingly authoritarian and anti-Western Russia. So called rogue states like North Korea and Iran and Iraq, civil war in places like the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. There had been terrorist attacks even against the United States prior to September 11th, 2001. Including a truck bomb that detonated in the lower levels of the very same World Trade Center in 1993, by individuals that, later were linked to the 9/11 attacks. And there was also a terrorist bombing in Oklahoma City. Perpetrated by Timothy McVeigh, a domestic terrorist with grievances against the US government linked to a standoff between government authorities and a commune in Waco, Texas actually. And at first, Timothy, that attack was assumed to be an attack by foreign terrorists, until they, they figured out who was behind it. And so, nevertheless, it's safe to say that terrorism was not a foremost threat on most Americans' mind prior to September 11th, 2001. Very few knew the names of Al Qaeda or of Osama bin Laden that became so eerily and infamously familiar to us after this attack. So the attack on 911 which was the largest terrorist attack in history according to your Mueller and Stewart reading for today, changed all of this. First and foremost, it immediately catapulted terrorism, terrorist groups, and states supportive of terrorism to the top of the agenda and the head of the list of threats against the United States. Immediately, that day, the Bush administration and president George W.Bush, himself, declared a so-called war on terror and dedicated immense American resources to this mission. So, that was the first thing. It, it, it, it focused what had been a multi-faceted American foreign policy mission against a variety of threats to this very immediate threat against the homeland. Second, it led to very rapid steps in the domestic realm here at home to protect the United States from future attacks. There are greater protections at airports immediately and at immigration points to keep those who would do us harm out of the United States. There were efforts to increase steps to find and root out other plots by individuals who may already be here in the United States in sleeper cells. The intelligence services who failed to put together the pieces of the 9/11 attacks before they happened were tasked with combating terrorist organizations abroad, and any cells or anything in the United States. All of these steps, from increased surveillance of citizens, increased security measures at airports or ports of entry, different immigration measures, and treatment of sus, suspected terrorists caught planning attacks on the U.S. created a new infrastructure of organizations, most notably the Department of Homeland Security. These measures also called into question and this is an important point. It called into question, the proper balance between individual liberties that we hold dear and, and you know, part and, and a parcel of our democratic system, and the security demands of preventing future attacks. It is precisely this balance that we're gonna be talking about more particularly on Thursday. But is at the root of all sorts of controversies over the use of torture, the ethics of, of that practice to sort of, to try to combat terrorist attacks but also the use of, of surveillance that has been in the news very recently over the past week, and other things such as drones and, and the like in our efforts of counter terrorism. Third, besides the measures taken within the United States to make it safer and to prevent another terrorist attack, the United States quite quickly entered into wars abroad. At least in part as a response to the attack on 9/11. It is important to imagine that the United -- it's difficult to imagine, that the United States would have decided to invade either Iraq or Afghanistan without the catalyst of these attacks on September 11th 2001. As a prong of America's new war on terror, the United States was arguably taking the fight against foreign terrorists to where they presumably lived, so that they could not travel to the United States and launch attacks on the U.S. 