 The next question that we're gonna address is the nature of the terrorist threat. And so what is the terrorist threat? It has now dominated U.S. foreign policy since 2001. One of the problems created by such a shocking event like. 9/11 sparking this new form policy mission, is that foreign policy decision makers had to react very quickly to a new set of circumstances with very little information. Most importantly, they had to define what this new threat of terrorism was. This exercise of defining the threat is vital. To producing a grand strategy in an over action framework that can coordinate the various part of a foreign policy strategy into one relatively coherent mission that cannot only direct policy but also, and this is very important, can be explained to the American public. This, this latter part explaining the mission to the American public is essential because it is the American public that is most affected in their daily lives by any counter-terrorism measure. Taken to increase security at home or any foreign military. Adventure that we'll send American troops into harm's way, and use scarce resources for what would become prolonged military conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq. Ultimately it is also the American public that chooses its leaders. Through competitive elections, and thus they have a hand in who's going to make the decisions, and arguably,even the content of these decisions then. So one way to understand the importance that defining the threat has for building a comprehensive foreign policy mission. Is a historical analogy. And of course, my favorite analogy is to the Cold War. But if you think about the Cold War, the United States faced a similar dilemma, although not as dramatic because of the attack on, on 9/11 against iconic targets here in the United States. But they faced a similar problem in the aftermath of World War II with the treat from the Soviet Union. There wasn't an agreement that there was, that the Soviet Union would necessarily be a threat. It had been a wartime ally during World War II and so members of the Roosevelt administration, members of the general public kind of hoped and, and thought that perhaps there could be some cooperation or at least mutual tolerance between the United States and the Soviet Union, to keep that relationship intact. It took George Tanin, as you'll remember from your readings and lecture, about the Cold War to sort of cast aside that, those presumptions. And define the Soviet threat in a way that would ultimately be the basis for containment policy. By defining the Soviet threat as expansionist but cautious, Kenin's definition of the threat did have a very direct impact on the foreign policy mission of containment that was the pillar for US foreign policy for 40 plus years during the Cold War. So if Kenin is the model, right? Or, or at least an analogy then it's vitally important to understand what the threat of terrorism is, what its character is. How do terrorist organizations act? What do they want? And what the extent of the threat is. How big or severe is the terrorist threat, threat to US interests and security? So, presumably, the place to start in defining the terrorist threat is to define terrorism. And this where your Byford reading comes in. However, like many general concepts, think democracy or dictatorship, the like. Establishing a workable definition that can be applied to all contexts and adequately differentiates different entities, in this case, differentiates between terrorists and non-terrorists, in all cases, is actually pretty complicated. The problem, of course, is that perspectives differ on who counts as a terrorist and who does not. One person's, or one state's, terrorist organization is another person's or state's rebel, or freedom fighter even. So, if you start with the question "what is terrorism?" Your Byford reading offers some possible criteria for identifying terrorism, but also then finds a variety of problems with each of these. So the first one is non-state actors. One way to define terrorism is that non-state actors using violence is a key criteria for labeling an entity a terrorist. But what Byford argues is that states have often used these same tactics and they sort of get off the hook. So, for example, rebels using violence to fight a dictatorial regime like in Saddam Hussein's Iraq, could be defined his terrorists according to this criteria while the repressive regime itself would escape any sort of pejorative level -- label like that. The second criteria, instilling terror, is another common definition of terrorism. It's using force to intimidate. However, this is done according to Byford and others all the time during wartime right? If you think of Sherman's march through the American South during the American Civil War you realize that a lot of different entities use violence to intimidate populations for political goals. And so Byford questions this criteria as well. The third way that scholars and others have defined terrorism as by specific methods. For example, suicide missions or suicide terrorism. But as Byford points out soldiers in conventional wars often also go on suicide missions. They're not labeled terrorists. They're often labeled heroes, right? And so that's often a problematic definition as well. And then the fourth way is of defining terrorism is to look at the target. If the intentional targeting and killing of civilians is an organization's primary means for accomplishing political goals then perhaps they, those are terrorists and the other entities who refrain from that are not. But again, this often happens and is perpetrated by entities that we often don't label as terrorists. Especially in war. Especially by states. So, the conclusion that Byford comes to is that it's very difficult to define in the abstract, terrorism or at least as terrorist threat as the United States is doing by means alone, by the tactics used alone. Terrorists, according to Byford, are usually identified explicitly or implicitly, not only by their means, but by their goals. And so Byford argues, we tend to excuse a lot in terms of means if we agree with the goals being pursued and he uses numerous historical examples to illustrate this. Jewish rebels, in opposition, used violence against the state of Nazi Germany during World War II. The African National Congress, under Nelson Mandela, which used violence against whites to battle against the apartheid system in South Africa was labeled a terrorist organization by some. But this is, it's difficult. These are examples of the difficulty of defining who is a terrorist and who is not. And so, it's important to keep that in mind. 