 The first question we're going to address is how are terrorist groups different from other threats, because that's a key aspect to figuring out the appropriate strategy to counter them. So since 9/11, it seems pretty clear that terrorist groups are the most likely organization that will dare to attack the United States, and this is important. There are states that threaten US interests, as can be seen by the actions of Russia in Ukraine, or the behavior of Iran in trying to get a nuclear weapon and also in its activities in Yemen and other arenas, but neither of these actors, these states, or any other state, I would argue, is likely to attack the United States homeland militarily. However, as the attack on 9/11 showed and subsequent attempted attacks on the United States as well as terrorist actions in other countries, Great Britain, Spain, for example, terrorist groups are prepared and capable of directly attacking the United States and its allies. As such then, terrorist groups are a major threat that needs definition and understanding. So what makes terrorist groups different as a threat? The key differences revolve around the fact that they are not states. Since they are not states, they tend to possess several characteristics different from states that influence their behavior. And so terrorism and the difference in fighting states versus non-state actors is a key element of this whole debate. So what's different about non-states? First, there's the power differential. Terrorist groups tend to be weaker than states. They have fewer resources and less military might. This relative weakness helps to determine their tactics such as the use of suicide bombers. In fact, analysts and others have often described terrorism as the weapon of the weak. And so the power differential helps to explain some of the tactics. Secondly, because they're not states, terrorist have different and typically more limited goals. Now this differs from case to case. Terrorist groups tend not to try -- but in general, terrorist groups, tend not to try to hold territory. Indeed, that is one of the things that makes ISIS so unique in its desire and ability to hold territory and its ambition to be a state, hence the name, "The Islamic State." But often terrorist groups are trying to do other things. They try to change a target state's foreign policy, for example. They use terrorist attacks on say, American citizens to try to force the United States government to get out of the Middle East, or terrorist groups might try inflict terrorist attacks in India to force India out of Kashmir, a territory that is in contention and controversy. So that's the second big difference, is goals. Thirdly, there's a big difference in deterrence, or the potential for deterrence. Because terrorist groups are not states, they have no "home address," right? There's not a territory that we can easily find, their capital and the like. And because of this, they cannot be easily deterred with a retaliatory threat. Now why is that? Well the reason is pretty simple. They're hard to find. If you threaten some extreme some extreme retaliation on a terrorist group but then can't find the leaders or the organization, then your threat isn't as credible. And so there's been a long debate about whether you can actually deter terrorist groups or not and one of the biggest problems with that is the fact that they don't have territory. And fourthly, their strategies and tactics. There's a debate whether terrorist groups are strategic and rational at all. Do they have concrete goals that they are trying to accomplish or are they somehow irrational organizations devoted to radical ideologies? States are assumed by and large to be more or less rational because they tend to be stakeholders in the international system. They have borders and territories, citizens, governments, but all could be lost if they act too aggressively or too radically. Now, this combination of different power relationships, goals, deterrence, and strategy makes terrorist groups significantly different from states as adversaries. That's the United States, which has the finest foreign policy around states for most of its history has had to adjust significantly to this new adversary. 