 There is a debate over whether one can view terrorist organizations as rational actors that pursue concrete goals in the international realm simply using very violent means and so they're not that different from other types of organizations. Their tactics are simply different. Now some scholars like Abrams that I've mentioned here, they argue that no, terrorist groups are not rational actors as we typically understand them. And this line of argument claims that terrorist groups do not have concrete enough goals, they seem to be shifting all the time and etc., and are too dedicated to radical goals and ideologies to use utilize cost-benefit analyses to determine their strategy, to see if well, "If we attack here, will this work to achieve this goal," "or will it be counterproductive?" After all, certain members of terrorist groups are prepared to die for the cause in the form of suicide terrorism. From this perspective, terrorism is better understood as a cultural phenomenon embedded in either radical ideology or best understood in terms in the psychology of marginalization in which terrorist groups provide a sense of identity or belonging to their members, right? Think in terms of Hollywood of the Heath Ledger character in The Dark Knight movie, the Batman, the recent Batman trilogy. You know, why was he he blowing up everything? He wanted to just see the world burn and to create chaos for no apparent concrete goal, right? For just chaos itself. This perspective sort of comes in various forms but sorts of equates some terrorist organizations to that kind of mentality. Now on the other hand, some scholars and I mentioned Kydd and Walter here argue that terrorist groups are much like any other group pursuing political goals. Terrorist groups are rational actors that simply use violence because they view it as the only means available to them due to their weakness and because it often works to achieve concrete goals. So arguably, if they could achieve their goals through other means, or if violence stopped working to achieve their goals, then they would not use it. Now, it's important to know here that it would be preferable from a counter-terrorism strategy perspective, from the United States' perspective as we try to combat these terrorist groups, if terrorist groups are indeed rational, they go through these cost-benefit analyses and have real political goals they're trying to achieve, because then we could conceivably devise a strategy that would create incentives for terrorist groups to choose other means, than terror, to pursue their goals. So what are terrorist goals according to this perspective and their subsequent strategies? Kydd and Walter argue that terrorist strategy should be seen as costly signals to adversaries to influence the target's behavior. So terrorism is about sending a message and having that message change the target's behavior. They identify in their work five goals that terrorist groups typically have in trying to change the behavior of their target like the United States and I have them listed here. I'm not going to go through all of them, but it's important to note that from this perspective what a terrorist organization wants to do depending on the conflict it's involved in is it wants to -- it's engaged in a battle of attrition, they want to outlast their adversary and so, you know, suicide attacks and the like might be effective in that way, right? They might want to provoke a conflict for their long term goals and some argue that the 9/11 attack and Osama Bin Laden's strategy there -- and Al Qaeda's strategy there was to get the United States to militarily intervene in the Middle East because then they could more easily expose the United States as they see them, imperialist and the like, and also to defeat them through similar tactics. There's also intimidation or spoiling which often happens in attacks during peace processes and finally, and this is important to note because of the current situations, there's the idea of outbidding competition between terrorist groups in which organizations use violence to attract members and escalate the violence because that is a way to gain more exposure and greater adherence. 