 So now we want to take a few minutes to discuss the Hoffman reading and orient it within this module. I think you can think about Hoffman as making two sets of claims. The first is an assessment of the threat posed by ISIS and his view is rather grim. ISIS poses a serious threat to Europe and the United States through something he calls boomerang effect. In this situation, citizens from Europe and the United States travel to Syria or Iraq, participate in the Syrian Civil War for ISIS, become battle hardened and trained in terrorist tactics, and then return to their home countries to perpetrate terrorist attacks. Obviously the attacks in Paris and Brussels are examples of this threat posed by ISIS. His argument about the scope of this boomerang effect rests on the second set of claims that highlight and illustrate the organizational and military capacities of ISIS. Hoffman argues that ISIS is a terrorist threat because it is increasingly effective as a traditional state and that it does the typical things that states do like... hold and govern territory, collect taxes, build an effective military apparatus, recruit more adherents to its guiding ideological principles, and train future terrorists. Next I want to talk about a couple of connections we hope you made between this reading and prior material. First you should read this article alongside the Byman reading that was assigned for the module on civil war and great power intervention civil wars. The Byman and Hoffman readings both complement and contradict each other. They reinforce each other by underscoring the central importance of the Syrian civil war to a diffusion of the broader terrorist threat around the world. A Syrian civil war is an incubator for terrorism. Byman argues that the United States has to consider alternative kinds of intervention in unstable political systems to prevent civil war and the growing potential for terrorism that can grow out of it. Hoffman focuses on how the Syrian civil war is providing a means for ISIS to build its organizational capacity and train terrorists to support its broader political agenda of creating a caliphate in the Middle East. They differ though in the distinctions they draw between Al Qaeda and ISIS. While Byman focuses on differences like the desire to hold territory, Hoffman suggests that ISIS has effectively co-opted the larger political agenda of Al Qaeda while proving to be more effective in achieving it. This shows up in his discussion of the 7 stages of organizational progression that Al Qaeda adopted and that ISIS appears to be effectively pursuing. He also wants to make this somewhat controversial case that ISIS has been careful not to alienate or distance itself from Al Qaeda. The second connection that we would like you to draw between Hoffman and the discussion in the pre-class modules of terrorists are rational political actors. You can see at least three examples or three elements of Hoffman's discussion which suggest that ISIS is effectively pursuing a broader political strategy designed to entrench or expand its influence in the Middle East. For example, it is engaged in provocation, designed to draw the West and the United States into a deeper conflict, to create a quagmire in the Middle East. You can think of the attacks in Europe in these terms. ISIS justifies them in term of their response to prior attacks and imperialism by the western powers, but you can also think of this strategy in terms of Obama's restraint with respect to ISIS that is generating a lot of political criticism of him. In one sense you can make the argument that he's trying to prevent the United States from getting provoked so it doesn't get dragged into another extended conflict in which the US cannot fully eliminate the terrorist threat posed by ISIS and the challenges associated with ejecting ISIS from Iraq and Syria. Now you can also see evidence in both the Hoffman and Byman readings of a strategy of outbidding relative to Al Qaeda. Here, ISIS engages in increasingly violent and despicable acts of public violence against civilians like taped beheadings uploaded to the Internet to demonstrate that it possesses greater resolve and capabilities relative to Al Qaeda. As a consequence it sends a potential -- a signal to a potential jihadee that if you want to win you should join ISIS rather than Al Qaeda. And you can see some evidence of this in Hoffman's discussion of ISIS' increasing recruiting effectiveness. Finally while the readings don't discuss this, you can also see an obvious role for intimidation and ISIS' broader political strategy. For example, many of the Sunni tribes in western Iraq that previously supported the Iraqi government have acquiesced to rule by ISIS because they do not believe that the Iraqi government is capable of protecting them any longer. 