 ﻿1 If you look at the outline of your syllabus, you will see that this module begins a new unit that focuses on the role of military force in American foreign policy. The first introductory portion of the class was designed to answer the following questions. What is foreign policy? What is grand strategy? How does societal interest, and the structure of domestic institutions shape American foreign policy? We then move to a brief overview of a series of important foreign policy decisions made by the United States since The Declaration of Independence. This historical section challenge characterizations of the evolution of American institutions as occurring in a domestic political bubble that is insulated from the external forces associated with such things as globalization and war. These external forces have long shaped and pressed American institutions, and Americans themselves, to adapt and adjust. We cannot understand what the United States is, and what it means to be an American without understanding how the United States has interacted with the rest of the world since its independence. For example, war in Europe played a critical role in shaping the origins of the United States at the turn of the 19th century, and its emergence as a global power in the first quarter of the 20th century. In this next portion of the class, we want to help you understand why the capacity for military coercion is so central to political life. We'll ask, how does violence and war shape international politics? How does the international system we know today rest on American military power? This module introduces some basic concepts for this discussion. The first segment discusses how the construction of a stable political order paradoxically rests on the capacity of a group to engage in organized violence. It will provide basic definitions of politics and authority. It will also introduce something called the fundamental dilemma of politics, and discuss how it influences political outcomes within states, and in the broader international system among states. The second segment defines war, and talks about just war theory. The third segment discusses the Crawford reading that was assigned for this module. 