 Now we want to examine how the capacity to engage in violence shapes political interaction and the formation of political orders. But before we do that, we first need to define what we mean by politics. What's political interaction? I want you to understand first that politics is an innately social process. It is about coordinating or directing the behavior of lots of people. Thus, it is a way to understand social behavior or how people interact with each other. So political scientists tend to focus on one means by which social behavior is coordinated. And that is the presence or absence of authority relationships. Economists tend to focus on how social behavior is generated or coordinated through markets. Psychologists look to individual cognitive, or emotional sources of social behavior. And sociologists, look at culture and at norms. So, a standard definition of politics characterizes it as the authoritative allocation of scarce resources. Now, there are two important components to this definition. The first is the presence of authority. Authority is the capacity to direct social behavior or the actions of others. Someone or something, say a political organization that possesses authority, can tell you to do something that you might not otherwise do and then impose a penalty or a cost on you if you fail to follow that directive. In this way authority often rests on coercion. However, authority is distinct from pure coercion, and that it is also legitimate, which means that the target of the directive recognizes the right of the person in authority to make those decisions, even if they disagree with the specifics of a decision. So in summary, politics is about the use of authority to coordinate social behavior. So let me give you an example of this. The federal government orders us to pay a proportion of our income every year in income taxes. There are probably a lot of us that don't like this. We do it anyway for a number of reasons. The government threatens us with physical coercion, that is throwing us in jail if we violate that directive. >> Moreover, a lot of people comply with that directive, because they believe that the act of the federal government collecting revenues to pay for military protection or things like roads is a legitimate act of government. Note as well that people can think this collection is legitimate, even if they disagree with the amount being collected. Thus, you can have lots of Republicans, for example, that think federal taxes are too high and they then engage in political activities designed to reduce or eliminate those taxes. Despite this political disagreement though, most of these same Republicans still follow the directive to pay taxes, because they think that the Federal Government's right to collect those revenues is legitimate. So, if politics is about authority, it's also about using that authority to settle conflicts among individuals or groups within society. And this brings us to the second component of this definition. The allocation of scarce resources. Scarcity implies that everyone's demands for something or some resource cannot be satisfied. This unmet demand activates some conflict over how those scarce resources will be allocated. Which groups get their needs met and which groups don't. Politics is about using authority to settle those distributional conflicts within society. So for example, when Barack Obama and the Democrats won in 2008, Obama had campaigned on higher taxes for the wealthy as a means to help get the budget deficit back under control. The Congress and the President, eventually pass legislation raising taxes on people making more than $400,000 a year. Thus, a conflict within the United States over how the fiscal responsibility for the budget deficit taken on in the after math of the wars in Iraq, Afghanistan. And the financial crisis of 2008 would be allocated was settled by an agreement in which the President and the Congress together directed or ordered wealthy individuals to assume more responsibility for this deficit burden. Next, we want to exploit this definition of politics to examine why the capacity to engage in violence is so central to political order. So first, let me define what I mean by say, political order. I think of, of political order as simply stable patterns or regularities of social behavior that are induced or set by authority relationships or coercion. Now, remember the relationship between authority and coercion. Coercion or the ability to impose costs is generally necessary to the provision of authority, but coercion on its own does not equate with authority. The presence of authority implies that its holder also possesses legitimacy. Not all individuals or groups that can coerce are also legitimate. Think here about the schoolyard bully. He takes lunch money under the threat of beating his target up, but his target doesn't view these actions as legitimate or recognize the right of the bully to extort his money. So let's talk about the capacity to coerce might be necessary to the provision of authority and I want to do this with a thought exercise. I imagine a few of you have been down on 6th Street when the bars close at 2 o'clock in the morning, you probably noticed a few things. A lot of inebriated people, many of them doing questionable things, like getting in a car to drive. Or perhaps, starting a fight with someone on the street and you probably saw a lot of police officers down there. So what is the police officer's role in society there to enforce the law? To ensure that violators of the law are punished, so that people can feel safe being out at that time without providing for their own security, either by carrying a gun or by hiring private security services. Note though, how police officers enforce the law. Their directives, their orders to people to stop fighting to go home are backed by the capacity to physically coerce people for noncompliance. Physically detaining individuals and then hauling them to jail. Note also that most people down on 6th Street view this as a legitimate use of coercive force. Now, imagine what would happen if police just laid down their arms and walked off their jobs at 1:30 in the morning. Would everyone just go home peacefully? Many would, but some people, perhaps those stronger than others or perhaps those that are already armed or maybe just the ones that possess new liquid courage, start creating problems. Hassling people, threatening to take their money. How would people respond to this situation in which the pe, in which the police officers went home? Many people would just stop going to 6th Street, because they're concerned for their safety, which would kill economic activity. Others though, would start to arm themselves in part, because they expect others to do the same. All of a sudden, though the social dynamics changed very rapidly when people now have to protect themselves. The only people that would show up on 6th Street would be the ones that are armed or that could pay for their own private security services. Let me ask you this. Do you think there would be more or less violence on 6th Street, if everyone down there at night had a gun and you didn't have police officers? In short, one of the take away points here is that the capacity to use physical force is sometimes necessary to enforce laws that are designed to coordinate social behavior. This is one of the claims of Hobbes in Leviathan. You centralize power and give its holders the capacity to deploy it, so that people don't harm each other and their property so that in general society can function. This also though, opens up a dilemma that Rob is going to introduce for us. >> All right. So we're making the claim here that the use of physical force is necessary to create a stable political order. At the same time, once you endow individuals or political organizations with this capacity, you also grant them the capacity to use that power for their own gain. Potentially to augment their coercive power. And so the very same power that maintains order can also be abused, right? To create disorder or predation. You can think about this in terms of something called predation, which I just said. Which is the forcible redistribution of resources. This is the political equivalent, political equivalent of armed robbery by some political organization. When it comes to armies, the idea is that armies in the field get to keep what they conquer. For examper, for example, Hitler's armies took new territory in Eastern Europe in the first phases in of the war and they used the resources. In this territory, to feed the army, to res, resupply it, and to feed Germans working in factories back in the homeland. So, there's a big political challenge. The fundamental dilemma of politics, we would argue, right here. What we are saying is that, political stability rests on the capacity to enforce directives with violence. Pat's example from Sixth Street, which clearly drew from some personal experience. >> And the experience of being a boy when he was- >> In grade school. It's really kind of troubling. So but, even though you need the violence to maintain political order, this power can also be used for predation or theft, just ask Pat McDonald. So, we need this power, but it can also be abused. How then do you endow a government with enforcement capacity, but constrain it, so that power cannot be abused? Successful societies over the long run have solved this problem more or less via democracy in most cases. The same dilemma. Operates in the international realm. History has seen predators, that use military force to plunder, and redistrib, redistribute resources away from the weak. Hitler's wars of expansion after 1939 illustrate this. You can also think of ISIS in similar terms today. What would happen, if no counter bailing force stepped up to stop these countries, and their armies from using military force in this predatory way? I don't think it's a stretch to say, that they would continue to expand their predation, becoming self-sustaining. It's getting rewarded, and that's we'll just continuing. They use force to take new territory. They use, of newly captured resources to feed their armies, and re, re-arm them. And also use it to recruit more soldiers along the way, if necessary, and do the same thing all over again. And so, there is a sort of, recurring cycle here, potentially. Sometimes these attempts to forcibly expand, need be to countered with military force, arguably. If not, what is the option? Continue to make concessions perhaps to these predators, and allow them to engage in extortion from the groups that aren't willing to protect themselves. These are the concerns raised by both Democrats and Republicans in the US, and many other governments around the world. ISIS has to be pushed back, they argue because they are taking new territory, taking new resources, and doing horrible things to people left in their wake. So this is the dilemma. However, using the ISIS, Iraq, and Germany examples here, the US faces a dilemma, the same one that we've already discussed. These situations created a demand for am, American Military Power, and middle either was or has been some significant disagreement about the immediacy of the need for American Military Power, but we'll leave that aside. Given this demand, the US intervenes with force, and in the first two cases, I, ISIS and Iraq successfully defeats the adversary, or well, Iraq and- >> Iraq and Germany. >> Germany, right. Sorry. Sorry. Not ISIS yet, at least. Military victory though, brings a new challenge. How do you make any new use of American military force legitimate, after it has been deployed initially? Think about it this way. Even if people agreed with the use of war, use of milit, American military force in this case, to topple Saddam Hussein, leader of Iraq. Is the continuation of American Military presence in Iraq, after Saddam Hussein was deposed, after 2004 still legitimate? If so, why? Many argue that the legitimate use of force to generate a social order rests on a, acknowledging a set of rules, and limitations that govern the condition under which force is used, and then abiding by those limitations, some sort of, rule of law. Right? But remember that dilemma, if you have the military power to rewrite the rules as you go, how can you reassure everyone around you that you won't do that very thing? Use your force to create rules, and, and break them when you will for your own gain. Now, the United States solved this fundamental dilemma of political authority, and the use of force after 1920, by simply withdrawing militarily from Europe, and then retreating to isolationism in the 1930s. So in the aftermath of World War I, you solved the problem by simply getting out, right? This withdrawal though, then created a new set of problems. A political vacuum that Adolf Hitler filled by engineering a massive new military force that threatened huge chunks of the world with death and occupation. So the US faced this same challenge again in 1945. It helped to defeat Germany, and then found itself in possession of the capacity to govern much of Western Europe as the hegemon with military force in place in that region. How did the United States solve this dilemma after the end of World War II? How did they make the continued use of American power legitimate in Europe during the 1950s, and the 1960s? Okay. So on the one hand, the existence of a Soviet threat itself helped to solve this dilemma during the Cold War. For America's allies, the alternative to American power and coercion, or at least the threat of coercion, succumbing to communism and Soviet Hegemony was a lot worse, than some sort of, alliance with the United States. America's role as the principal military force containing the Soviet Union and its spread, that's helped to legitimize the use of American power, especially in Europe during the Cold War. Note though, that this dilemma risk of disappearing in the absence of that Soviet threat, when the Soviet Union collapses, the existence of a strong American military presence in Europe comes under threat. And possibility we will return to in a section when we talk about the 2003 Iraq war. Once, Saddam Hussein is removed, why is the United States still in Iraq? Now a second argument made by John Ikenberry, is that U, the US successfully bound it's own power, making it legitimate by subjecting itself, right? It's own military power to the constraints of democracy in the United States, and a series of international institutions like NATO. Which is the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. So, in the case of democracy, the President cannot use force until getting a, support from congress and the public. This creates important constraints on the use of military force, that then helps to reassure other countries. That it won't be used arbitrarily. And so democracy helps this central problem of politics by placing constraints on leaders and their use of force. Partici, also, participating in a multilateral alliance like NATO can do the same thing. The expectation is that the United States will consult its allies giving them some capacity to influence decisions to use military force. Now the war against Iraq in 2003 questioned these claims and reopened the larger dilemma focused here on, in today's lecture. A number of American allies opposed the decision to use military force in Iraq, and yet the United States did it anyway. Quite simply, is the US -- is US military sufficiently constrained, or was the United States embarking on a broader political program, a subtle one, of expansion in the Middle East? Some critics viewed it as doing precisely that. Ikenberry writes a series of critical articles of the Bush administration in the aftermath of the Iraq war for this very reason. He worried that its failure to observe a series of self-imposed limits on the use of American military might, limits that had been at the very core of the post 1945 settlement, could threaten to unwind the larger international political order that had the US at the center of that order. The action against ISIS currently, potentially illustrates this same challenge. President Obama casts the US as the indispensable nation. What happens then if and when ISIS is defeated using US military force. Does the US then move on to topple President Assad in Syria? Does it threaten to destable, to destabilize a Shia government in Iraq, or go back in with military intervention if a civil war breaks out there. The point of all of this is that these political challenges also create opportunities for the US to flex its military muscle, which then can activate a new insecurity on the part of other countries around the world. And so you have this central problem. We need force to impose and maintain political order but that very same force can be used for predation, and as a threat of the very order that is established by it. >> Okay. So, let's move into a recap of this larger discussion about how stable political orders are nested in the legitimate use of violence and then we're gonna take some questions. There's a lot of good questions up on the board. First, we define politics as the use of authority to allocate scarce resources. Politics is about using authority to coordinate social behavior and settle conflicts within society over the distribution of things of value. So we're gonna to use authority to settle disagreements within society. Second, we argued that authority rests significantly on the capacity to enforce these directives, which often requires the deployment of physical coercion. The presence of authority simultaneously, though, implies that the use of force is legitimate, which means that it accepts some, generally means that it accepts some bounds on the use of military force. Third, we discussed the fundamental dilemma of politics. If some form of violence capacity is necessary for society to function, then this power can also be abused. Societies that have been both stable and successful in the long run have settled this dilemma by erecting constraints on the use of violence. Such as institutional constraints within democracies or the rule of law that reduces the arbitrariness of the use of force. Now finally, this dilemma has significant implications for American foreign policy. The US is the strongest military power in the world. There have been many military and political challenges in the last century that have demanded some form of response from the United States. At the same time, America's capacity to shape the larger international political order and ensure that American citizens would continue to benefit from it, rest on creating some constraints on Ameri, American military power that help to make it more legitimate. The decision to go to war in Iraq created some new uncertainty about whether these constraints still operate. And as a consequence, generated some push back against the American order that had been established in the post 1945 period. You can think about Russian and Iranian efforts to confront the United States in the last three or four years in these terms as a response to the uncertainty associated with, "is American power bound in the current period?" 