 Let's move on to an overview of a reading from a previous lecture by Netta Crawford on how Just War Theory does and does not apply to the current context of America fighting a war of counter-terrorism against organizations such as Al-Qaeda and ISIS. It must be noted that Crawford published this article in 2003. More than ten years ago, and only two years after the attack on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on September 11th, 2001. It's quite twe, telling, I would say, how relevant many of her arguments are in 2015. Now, I wanna make several main points regarding this reading, but please note this isn't a detailed. Argument. This, this article presents a very detailed argument that you need to read carefully. And so these points are meant to provide an overview and some context rather than all the details of Crawford's argument. So let me just sort of summarize some of the things that Crawford brings up so that you can begin to take a closer look at this article. Now, Crawford makes the point that Just War Theory was never a perfect fit for war at any stage in history. Just War Theory has a long history dating back centuries. And never fit perfectly with any of her eras of war that she lays out in the article. Many innovations of war, for example, nuclear weapons, which we will discuss in detail on Thursday, have provided serious complications for just war theory. So terrorism and counter-terrorism is just the latest instance of such complications. So, second Crawford notes the following paradox. After the attacks on 9/11 the Bush administration offered two potentially contradictory arguments. One, war has been transformed and thus could not be fought by the United States in the way that it fought wars in the past and perhaps the rules governing wars and might have to be suspended. But secondly, she also notes that the counter-terrorism war against the perpetrators of 9/11 and those who supported them was in line with just war theory. It was according to the Bush administration a just war. And they used the rhetoric of Just War Theory to defend the war. The rest of her article really just investigates the complications of these two declarations. Third. Crawford agrees that war has been transformed by the rise of non-state actors and the use of terrorism and other methods targeting non-combatants. Basically agreeing with the Bush Administration and its position that war has been transformed. She lays out reasons for this transformation, that I won't cover in full here, based on the aims, the nature of combatants and the conduct of war. But basically as shown on the slide, Crawford argues that war has been transpor -- transformed because both terrorists and states fighting against terrorists are compelled to fight other using different tactics than what was used when states simply fought other states on more defined battlefields. Additionally like previous wars between states, for instance World War II, wars between states and terrorist organizations don't have a de, definitive beginning, middle and end. That's blurring the line between war and peace. Furthermore, terrorist attacks usually happen unexpectedly. And the target population demands very quick reaction to such attacks. This makes initiating wars and conducting wars using the criteria of just war theory. Much more difficult. So, so that's how war has been transformed, more or less. Now after Crawford lays out this central paradox. That is, remember, war has been transformed making Just War Theory harder to apply, but the U.S. still wants to defend its counter-terrorism wars as just-wars. She goes into detail about the difficulties that this approach is going to face in re, America's current military engagements. She first shows that the Bush administration did use the rhetoric of Just War Theory to defend its actions against terrorists and those who sponsor terrorism. Using the example of its attack on the, on the Taliban regime. in Afghanistan shortly after the 9/11 attacks. The Bush administration argued that the preemptive wars in Afghanistan and especially also in Iraq later, were justified as self-defense. Moreover, the Bush administration also argued that the attack on Afghanistan, which it. Said was harboring Osama Bin Laden at the time, was taken as a last resort after the demand of handing Bin Laden over was not met. And so they are using precisely the language of Just War Theory. Secondly, the war was also defended in terms of just conduct of war. The second, main element of Just War Theory with special emphasis on discrimination between combatants and non-combatants. And so it should be noted that the Bush administration was careful to note that the war on terror was not, was not a war against Islam itself. And this is something that is coming into public attention again with the Obama administration, who has continued this line of argument but has faced a lot of criticism for it. And finally, Crawford lays out a total of 12 complications that terrorism and counter-terrorism present for the application of Just War Theory. Broken down into three main categories: perennial concerns, novel concerns, and outside concerns. And so perennial concerns are these concerns that have been around Just War Theory for, you know, years and centuries. Not just in the current war on terror. Novel concerns are sort of specific to, the current circumstances, and outside concerns are critics of Just War Theory itself. Now, I listed the questions that come into play from Crawford's, article on the slides, but I'm not gonna go over all of them. Just note that most of these questions that she raises deal with how interests and the conflict between the United States and terrorist organizations is defined and framed. So finally, what is Crawford's conclusion after all this? This is going to be something that you're gonna be needing to grapple with. Is Just War Theory still relevant despite all the transformations in war that terrorism presents? I would say Crawford would give a resounding yes. She claims, at the end of this article, that it is very hard to imagine a just counter terror war. However, she claims that this does not mean Just War Theory is somehow now irrelevant. She claims just the opposite. She argues that this suggests the United States needs to take a different approach, that de-emphasizes counter terrorism war. And emphasizes counter terrorism defense and taking an, an approach that emphasizes peace tactics rather than war. And finally, an approach that attempts to remedy the sources of terrorism. 