 This module continues our discussion about the role of military force in international politics and in U.S. foreign policy. In the last module we talked about great power war, the role of their peace settlements in structuring relations among states and the implications of great power peace for American power and influence. However we will discuss here a shift in the location of violence and war. Just as great powers seemed to have solved the problem of war among themselves, there has been a spike in civil wars, those that occur within states since the end of the Cold War. Consequently in this module, we examine what role the United States might play in this shifting landscape of organized violence. We will explore such questions as, why does civil war occur? Can the United States limit these wars with military intervention? Does the United States have a moral obligation to halt attacks on civilians in these conflicts. How does the expansion or escalation of these civil wars threaten vital American interests? This module will be divided into six segments. The first describes some of the patterns in the shift from interstate to intrastate or civil war, since the end of the Cold War. The second segment steps back to provide a broader foundation for this conversation by asking and answering a very basic question - why do wars occur? This conversation will present something called the bargaining model of war from which we will identify two classes of answers to this question of what causes war. The first focuses on something called private information and the second identifies something called the commitment problem. The third segment applies this general discussion of the causes of war to the more specific problem of civil war. It highlights the role of the commitment problems in these seemingly intractable conflicts that are often characterized by religious or ethnic differences. The fourth segment talks about how great powers like the United States can alter the patterns of destruction and outcomes in civil wars through military intervention. We provide two competing perspectives here. One holds up great power intervention as an important mechanism to create peace by alleviating the commitment problem. The other discusses how the possibility of external intervention might instead exacerbate the challenges associated with protecting civilians during wartime. The fifth segment introduces responsibility to protect as a conceptual vehicle to discuss some of the practical ethics of humanitarian intervention. It's discussion relies in part on a journal article by Robert Pape that is cited on your overview slide. And the sixth segment briefly discusses the two readings, one by Simon and Stevenson and the other by Daniel Byman that were assigned as part of this module. 