 Now, last time we discussed some of the larger political consequences of the peaceful end of the Cold War and so we ended our historical overview. On the one hand, this event, the end of the Cold War presents itself as powerful evidence supporting the claim that great power war might be over. On the other hand, our discussion of contemporary Russian foreign policy in the aftermath of its loss in the Cold War, suggests extreme dissatisfaction with the broader international order. And this has led to Russian attempts to change it, even if it doesn't confront the United States directly with the threat of war. So this whole crisis over Ukraine is an illustration of this latter dynamic. And another one in the sense that the end of the Cold War has prompted a growth in the outbreak of civil war and a shift in scholarly attention from interstate war to civil war. Interstate meaning war between states. The slide that appears on the screen now shows some of these prominent conflicts. I included some of the estimated fatality counts here. That includes deaths of civilians and soldiers to illustrate that war is definitely not over in this era of great power peace. The killing is just as outrageous as it has, has historically been. Perhaps even more so than in the Cold War, which had a great power conflict, but not great power war in the direct sense. The outbreak of war has simply shifted. Still prominent in Asia and Africa, many of these new conflicts occur with the territorial boundaries. Political entities that had been recognized by as sovereign by other states. Now, the resolution of the German problem in Europe in 1964 really helped to shift the locus of the Cold War competition between the United States. And the Soviet Union out of Europe and into Asia, Latin America and Africa. The Vietnam War is an example of this change. For our purposes here, it is important to realize that this globalization of the Cold War meant that the two super powers became more active in cultivating allies. Often autocratic ones, meaning dictatorships in newly independent states in the third world. While the United States looked for conservative leaders capable of countering or suppressing leftist political movements, the Soviet Union sought to encourage them. That is, leftists political movements. This competition facilitated massive transfers of aid and material from the great powers to these countries, which then helped to prop up leaders facing the challenges of governing new states in a post-colonial world. So the end of the Cold War halted many of these flows and created a new reality for many leaders in the developing world. So the end of the Cold War was a watershed event. They could no longer rely on superpower support to maintain their hold on power domestically. Short on resources and then and often mired in perpetual underdevelopment, these leaders increasingly face local challenges to their rule. The withdrawal of military support created incentives to upend existing domestic political orders by force if necessary. There was a second dynamic at work that activated a number of these civil conflicts. The collapse of authoritarian regimes that had ruled multi-ethnic societies in places like in Yugoslavia and many former Soviet republics removed one of the mechanisms, namely physical suppression, that had limited the expression of ethnic grievances during the Cold War. Political openness sometimes helped to make societies with old ethnic conflicts more vulnerable to the problem of civil war. 