 Before talking more about the conditions that activate civil war, I want to take a step back and address the broader question of why war occurs. The literature in political science on this question has really settled on a basic theoretical understanding of this problem over the last decade or so. And this framework is something called the Bargaining Model of War. This perspective starts with an assumption, and it then uses that assumption to identify a puzzle. The assumption is simple: all wars are costly. This means that wars impose net costs on all of their participants. You can think about these costs in a number of ways. There are the human costs associated with killing people. There are the economic costs that get paid when the infrastructure of an economy like roads, factories, railroads, and airports get destroyed. And there are economic costs that show up as opportunity costs in an economy which are simply lost opportunities for civilians to make more money. For example, soldiers might get conscripted at below-market wage rates. They then lose the opportunity to raise their incomes by starting a new business or earning a steady income working on a farm or in a factory. The reality that all wars are costly is then used to motivate a puzzle in the bargaining model of war. And you can think about this puzzle in the following terms. Imagine that we represent the wealth of two economies or two countries with a pie. Next, imagine that a political conflict between two states that activates war is driven by a disagreement over how that pie should be divided between the two sides. War is costly. This means that the act of war destroys some portion of that pie. The destruction of some portion of the pie then leaves a smaller portion of the pie to be divided among the contending or conflicting parties. Because war is costly then, and it imposes costs on all its participants, there should be some peace settlement that leaves all parties better off than if they had gone to war. Why? Because peace leaves a bigger pie to be divided. Which means that both sides should be better off. They have more to consume if they can jointly figure out how not to destroy some portion of the pie. So given this possibility that peace creates some dividend that leaves all parties better off, the puzzle of why wars occur is the following. Why can't warring states or groups identify and honor indefinitely some peace settlement or some pre-war division of the pie that avoids that costs of war and leaves both sides better off? In short, an understanding of why war occurs rests on understanding the factors that prevent competing organizations from reaching a peace settlement that leaves everyone better off. Now, there are two prominent answers to this question. We will spend very little time on the first, but I want to just discuss it briefly as it often helps us to understand short wars or minor skirmishes. The presence of something called private information or uncertainty about things like the distribution of military power between two states or the willingness of an adversary to pay the costs of war, something that we describe as a resolve, can lead to war by encouraging one side to overestimate its bargaining leverage. In these situations, one party overestimates its military strength and then fails to make sufficient concessions to other side during negotiations to preserve peace. You might think of this mechanism as a story about being too greedy. A state can capture some benefit by avoiding the costs of war, but it opts to demand too much, provokes the adversary, and ends up paying the costs that it could have avoided. So that's one explanation for why wars occur. The presence of private information leads one side to offer insignificant concessions in the pre-war negotiations that are designed to find a peace settlement that leaves both sides better off than if they had gone to war. Now, the second mechanism to understand a bargaining failure and the outbreak of war is called the commitment problem and this is where we're going to spend a lot of time in this module. You might think of the commitment problem as stemming from the difficulties of contracting, or contracting over time. You make a deal with someone today to deliver a set of promises or goods a year from now. You understand that their willingness to abide by those terms in a year might change. This fear that your opponent will demand new concessions in the future or violate some set of obligations in the future then inhibits you from constructing that deal today. So states will also go to war if they think that any peace deal struck with an adversary is not sustainable indefinitely over time. For example, one side could worry that an adversary might just use a period of peace created from a cease-fire to strengthen their military and then demand more concessions in the future from an augmented or strengthened bargaining position. Under these conditions, a state will fight now to avoid being militarily weaker in the future and then having to make a new set of political concessions in that weakened condition. One of the principal sources of a commitment problem is a rapid and large shift in the distribution of military or political power between two contending sides. Let me say this again. Commitment problems and the wars that follow from them stem from shifts in the distribution of power between contending sides in a dispute. Why? This growth in power encourages the rising side to demand in the future revisions to any political settlement made in the present. Thus, they might make a deal in 2020 over some distribution of territory and then ask for more territorial concessions in 2025. The stronger side can probably extract these concessions in 2025 because they will have a greater likelihood of defeating their adversary in a war then. And this greater likelihood shows up in the favorable shift in the distribution of military power between the two sides. On top of this, the adversary would want to try and avoid these costs of war in 2025. Faced with the possibility of a future of more political concessions, the declining side or the side that's growing weaker over time might then choose to opt for war in 2020. In 2020, they have a greater chance of achieving military victory and destroying the future military threat before it is fully realized. Now, this situation is called the commitment problem for the following reason. Peace in 2020 could be created by a commitment or a promise made by the rising states in 2020 not to demand future concessions in 2025. The dilemma stems from the fact that any promise made in 2020 from a position of relative weakness might simply not be credible. If a side that is getting stronger can break a promise in 2025 with impunity, then why should its adversary believe that any peace settlement that avoids the costs of war in 2020 is sustainable or will be honored. In the commitment problem story, the two sides can identify a fair deal in the present In 2020 in the hypothetical that we've been discussing, however, their fears that such a deal will not be sustainable into the future leads them to fight a war in the present. In sum, this segment has used something called the bargaining framework to identify two common causes of war. Both explain the outbreak of war in terms of the failure of two sides with conflicting political interests to reach some settlement of the issue in dispute. And that settlement would leave both sides better off and both sides, in order to create the peace, both sides need to believe that the other one has an interest in preserving that settlement indefinitely. We discuss two sources of bargaining failures. The first stems from something called private information. Uncertainty over things like the distribution of military power between two sides or the relative willingness of the two sides to sustain the costs of war, something we called resolved. So uncertainty over these things leads one of the two sides to overestimate their bargaining leverage in a dispute. As a consequence, that side that's overestimating its bargaining leverage or its capacity to win the military conflict offers insufficient concessions during peace talks and the other sides opts for war to secure more the issue in dispute. The second source of bargaining failure in war is the commitment problem. Commitment problems are caused by rapid and large shifts in the distribution of power between two sides in a dispute. The declining side opts to fight a war in the present because it fears that the rising side will use military threats to pressure it to make new concessions in the future. Peace could be sustained if the rising side could commit indefinitely to uphold or honor any compromised settlement. 