 So we just presented the bargaining model as a way to conceptualize or group the causes of war. Now, what does all of this have to do with civil war? Many civil wars are driven by a variant of the commitment problem. Here, I would like to provide three sets of examples to illustrate this connection. First, shifts in the distribution of military or political power between two contending factions or groups within a state can activate a commitment problem and thus start a civil war. This can occur when a government loses military or economic aid from an important patron like the United States or the Soviet Union during the Cold War. Or it can occur when a party or a social movement like Communism mobilizes a substantial group of society into a political force capable of challenging an incumbent government for the control of the state. For example, the withdrawal of American or Soviet financial and military support after the Cold War from a state like Afghanistan could have undermined the control of the existing regime. Unable to continue to pay its military or divert these resources to key support coalitions, the regime was then weaker relative to contending groups. This weakness can cause governments to make political concessions to a growing opposition movement through such things as greater political participation via democracy. However, these concessions can signal weakness and encourage opposition groups to demand more concessions that give them even more influence over the government. Now, the commitment problem here stems from an inability of the rising faction to limit its demands to remake the internal political order once it seizes power. In this situation, the fading autocrat launches a preventive civil war to quash domestic revolt. You can see these dynamics at play in Iraq after the initial invasion that toppled Saddam Hussein. Remember, the strength of Saddam Hussein's ruling party, the Ba'athist, was centered in western Iraq in Baghdad where sizable portions of the Sunnis which was a minority group in Iraq lived. The American war against Iraq obviously targeted the military which was an important source of political power for the Ba'athist party and Saddam. The war thus helped to shift the balance of power within Iraq away from the Ba'athists. When the United States pressed for democratization, it also meant that the majority group, the Shia, could then use legal institutional means to exclude the minority group, Sunnis, from power. For example, one post-Saddam prime minister, Nouri al-Maliki, did this after the United States withdrew the bulk of its military forces from Iraq. This demographic imbalance attributable to religious and ethnic differences coupled with this shift in domestic power created by American intervention to topple Saddam Hussein then created incentives for the Sunnis in western Iraq to align with Al Qaeda and wage a civil war against Shia military organizations. The Sunnis feared perpetual minority political status in a newly democratic Iraq as the Shia could simply outvote them because they constituted more than 50% of the population of the state. Second, ethnic imbalances within states can also activate commitment problems and civil war. In these circumstances, ethnicity provides a powerful device to mobilize groups and create collective action. Ethnic solidarity and identity are cast as protection against the threats posed by competing or alternative ethnic groups. Under these conditions, minority groups can have the same fears that we just described as possessed by the Sunnis in Iraq. Minority groups might be tempted to secede or declare independence, something that the Kurds would like to do in northern Iraq, to gain evermore autonomy and security. However, these demands for independence and can then prompt the dominant ethnic group to attack a minority group to maintain control over their resources of the country. Minority groups fear political situation akin to the tyranny of the majority. So long as hangs together as a coherent voting group, a majority group can use its power over the state to restrict the civil liberties of the minorities -- to impose higher taxes on them and to exclude them from positions of power and influence in both the government and the economy. The commitment problem stems from the inability of the majority group to respect minority rights. To impose legal restrictions on their own political power to disadvantage minority groups. Under some circumstances, the commitment problem can be solved and peace preserved with minority rights that might be protected through a constitution via civil liberties -- excuse me -- or some federal division of authority that grants sufficient local political control in regions that are populated predominantly by minority ethnic groups. Third, in addition to ethnicity, this imbalance of power among contending groups within society can also fall along economic lines when there are gross imbalances in the distribution of income. This often occurs when an economy depends on natural resources like oil. Given their access to the tools of military coercion, governments can nationalize these resources and then dole out their benefits to a narrow group of political supporters. The wealthy minority of the population fears that economic and political change, say through shifts in the distribution of income that allow the poor to grow wealthier or political openness through democracy will shift the distribution of power in the country against the wealthy minority. For example, democracy might enable the poor majority to write new tax legislation that raises taxes on the rich and then transfers that wealth to the poor. You can think about Hugo Chavez' policies in Venezuela as reflecting this dynamic and think about the attempted coup against him in 2002 as an effort by the wealthy elite who were dependent on oil revenues to try and prevent this redistribution to the masses. Most importantly, income inequality can activate grievances and commitment problem that makes civil conflict more likely. In this case, the commitment problem stems from an inability on the part of the poor majority of the population not to seize the riches of the wealthy minority if it consolidates power. The wealthy minority then can opt to fight or enlist the military in a coup against an official like Chavez. Okay, let's take a step back and review what we have discussed here. This segment presented three sources of an unequal distribution of power within society. An imbalance of political influence created by differential access to official levers of power in the regime, ethnic imbalances, and income inequality. Changes to these imbalances can activate commitment problems which then prompt civil war. We use this basic framework to offer one interpretation of how the American war to topple Saddam Hussein helped to activate a subsequent civil war in Iraq. 