 The discussion of the US in Iraq provides a good transition into the next topic for the day, and that is, how might international intervention from great powers, like the United States, alter the course of a civil war? We want to provide two really opposing perspectives on this question. The first perspective argues that international intervention is absolutely critical to the termination of civil wars. Civil wars are different from inter-state wars in an important way. In a civil war, one of the warring factions generally has to disarm themselves, and then trust the state apparatus that they will be protected. That is, there will be no retribution in the future from prior enemies. This period of disarmament, in which a neutral police force must be reconstituted, can be one of intense vulnerability, so much so that the losing side might opt to continue fighting in part because they expect to be killed after putting their weapons down in some sort of ceasefire or other end of fighting. This is a straightforward commitment problem. Fear of the future compliance leads one side not to strike a peace deal in the present, and instead to continue fighting. The situation is even more precarious for the losing side because the domestic institutions that might normally protect minority rights in a state, like an independent judiciary and police, some power sharing arrangement among contending factions, federalism, or basic minority rights that might be enshrined in something like a bill of rights, have been destroyed in the course of a civil war. In this situation, intervention by a great power can help to alliv, alleviate this commitment problem by overseeing and guaranteeing the peace. In a sense, the great power alleviates the fears of the minority, or losing group, and ensures that they are protected in a subsequent peace time state building process. You might think of surge of American troops in, after 2006 in Iraq as providing this function. You might also think about the withdrawal of those troops as eliminating this function and reactivating the commitment problem among the Shia, Sunni, and Kurds in Iraq. The example here in Iraq illustrates something else that is important, though. To be effective, the third party intervener has to be willing to stay the course to preserve the peace. In the case of the United States, this often means that a president has sufficient domestic support so that he can keep troops on the ground for an extended period of time. >> We're gonna see in a video clip at the end of the course with the interview with the Iraqi Prime Minister where he explicitly refers to this, the absence of domestic support in the United States for keeping troops in Iraq and how it's changing his, his strategy. So given this argument that suggests international intervention can help to end civil wars, I now want to give you the logic of a contending argument, developed by a professor here at UT, Alan Kuperman over at LBJ, that the expectation of great power intervention can actually make things worse on the ground in a civil war. Kuperman's argument rests on something called the moral hazard problem, and this concept has often been used to understand financial crises and it had been used to justify policy claims, that the US government should not have bailed out the big banks in 2008 and 2009. Its basic logic holds that the provision of insurance itself against some severe catastrophe can actually encourage the risky be, behavior that insurance is designed to protect against. In the case of the biggest banks in the United States, the argument implies that those big banks now expect a US government bailout in the future if they get into trouble again, because their firm's health is so important to the broader national economy. This expectation of a bailout, though, encourages them to take on riskier loans and, and, and engage in bad behavior, because their losses will be covered by the taxpayer. Taking on riskier loans, though, increases the chance that banks will have bad balance sheets, might fail, create a new crisis, and create a need again for the American taxpayer to bail them out. So the idea here is that the insurance mechanism itself can actually create the type of situation that you're trying to prevent. So, in the context of a civil war, Kuperman argues that expectations of American intervention in civil wars to protect civilians or prevent genocide can actually make genocide more likely. Secessionist groups that are losing the civil war could benefit from American intervention because that American military action would be targeted against their opponents that are winning the war. In this way, the American military influences and helps to set who wins the war and the peace. Consequently, this can paradoxically encourage secessionist groups that are losing the war to make strategic choices that leave civilian populations more vulnerable to ethnic cleansing, so as to prompt great power intervention. Now, while you may disagree with these conclusions, or even be frustrated by the possibility that American intervention might actually do more harm than good, there's an important strategic insight here that I don't want you to lose sight of, and it contains a lot of implications for American foreign policy more broadly. Here it is. Because the United States is so large and powerful, it can influence what goes on in societies even without actively intervening, say with military force or economic aid. The mere possibility of American intervention in a civil war can change how the civil war is fought or prosecuted. This means that American influence doesn't just rests on what the American president does say with the military, doesn't just rest on what the US does. It also rests on what it might do. Finally as a sidebar here to help you make some connections with all the material that we've been discussing in the course, I just wanted to let you know that Kuperman was a student of Barry Posen's at MIT. Remember, we read Posen's Defense of an Alternative Grand Strategy of Restraint, that really blended isolationism and offshore balancing. The policy implications that follow from this discussion of moral hazard of international intervention though, are consistent with Posen's broader grand strategy, that the US should probably stay out of a lot of these civil wars. This section has described two broad ways, one positive and one negative, in which large powers like the United States can influence the course of a civil war. So on the one hand, international intervention can help to end civil wars and build a sustainable peace by solving one form of the commitment problem that encourages one side to continue fighting. Because peace settlements are often require disarmament, they usher in a period of vulnerability for the losing side. Because the civil war has destroyed the domestic institutions normally relied on to protect their political rights and safety. Under these circumstances, the external power can act like a guarantor for these rights during the period of state-building that has to follow a civil war. Second, the discussion of moral hazard suggested alternatively that the possibility of intervention might actually encourage losing sides to make their civilian populations vulnerable, so as to invite external intervention that could turn the tide of war in their favor. Finally, I wanted you to take one larger point from this discussion of intervention. Great powers like the United States influence domestic politics and the possibility of civil war in smaller countries, whether they intervene there or not. In this sense, this discussion has reinforced a prior one which focused on the important role played by great powers in structuring international politics. 