 Now we're gonna look at the moral responsibilities, sort of the ethics behind intervention in civil wars, and in particular, humanitarian intervention. And the question here is, what is the moral responsibility of the United States, and other external powers, in a civil war? The ethical imperative for humanitarian intervention arises from a responsibility, arguably, to reduce harm in the form of human suffering. One primary form of such harm is genocide. And the definition I have here on from Pape on the slide is that genocide is the deliberate destruction of a nation or an ethnic group, usually by a state. It's pretty clear that stopping genocide is ethically permissible, meaning that we're allowed to go and try to stop genocide, it's not something that we should avoid for ethical reasons. It's probably a good thing to do. But it is not necessarily, and this is why the, where the question comes in, is it ethically required of a great power, like the United States, are we ethically bound to do something like intervene to stop a genocide or, and a civil war? That is a much more difficult threshold, in terms of practical ethics. The ethical requirement to stop genocide is complicated by four factors. First, genocide is often contested, such as in present day Syria, in which John Mearsheimer regre, regrets the civilian casualties caused by the Assad Regime, but openly questions whether these casualties amount to the threshold of genocide. Since time of, of, is of the essence in terms of international intervention, the, a delay in an international consensus on whether genocide has taken place, has undermined the international community from acting fast enough to stop mass killings at certain times. Second, Pape argues that genocide wrongly emphasizes the group over the collection of individuals that constitute the group. For Pape, the point is not that a group may be wiped out, but that a multitude, usually thousands, if not more, of individuals are killed. Third, fixation on the goal of stopping genocide may actually undermine future peace by destroying the states involved, and causing chaos and disorder. And, finally, the fourth reason that the ethic, the ethics are complicated around stopping genocide, is that stopping genocide does not take into consideration the cost to the intervening country to a great enough extent. While it may be tempting to count lives saved and decide that some measure of loss of life is worth the sacrifice on the intervener's part, of saving even more lives in the target country. This runs counter to other ethical frameworks, notably the rights-based framework. As Pape argues, it is not ethical, necessarily, to sacrifice someone's life to save another or even many others' lives, especially if the person who you're sacrificing the life of, like a soldier is, is in this against their will or at least they aren't volunteers. So, how do we then navigate this ethical responsibility? And even more expansive responsibility and ambitious policy of humanitarian intervention can be found in the so-called responsibility to protect or R2P doctrine. This expands the responsibility for humanitarian intervention beyond genocide to things like war crimes, crimes against humanity, and even natural disasters. The responsibility to protect also calls on states to prevent harm to citizens before, let me emphasize this, before it happens, and in the aftermath to rebuild societies after the intervention ends. In this sense, the obligations are very expansive and potentially never-ending. The problem, of course, is that this obligation, the right to, the responsibility to protect is Ar, arguably too expansive in that virtually all human suffering, and not just targeting of certain collections of individuals by their states, is open to protection. And the remedy can expand, as well, from ending human suffering to nation-building and regime change, which some view as an inappropriate and even neo-colonial exercise of power. So, in response to this controversy about stopping genocide, or the responsibility to protect in response to both of these norms -- Robert Pape was a very famous scholar who's, who's done a lot of work on the, these issues, has offered what he calls a pragmatic standard of humanitarian intervention. Which he argues strikes a balance not found in the other two doctrines. This pragmatic standard starts with a threshold of harm that Pape calls a mass homicide campaign sponsored by a state against a subset of its own citizens. He establishes a numerical threshold, several thousand victims actually are potentially harmed. This level of harm breaks the norm of sovereignty for Pape, and thus removes the protection that a sovereign state is due against foreign intervention. Next, Pape provides several requirements underlying the need to protect the interveners and let me stress that, the need to protect the interveners, the state that's intervening to stop a genocide or something like it, when they move in to stop the civil war. First condition, nearly zero casualties, and those involved in the intervention are volunteers. Secondly, the i, the target population is identifiable and separable from those not at risk. This helps to limit the intervention so it is not equal to conquering the whole country or engaging in regime change. Although the protected population may later decide to launch such campaigns like secession or regime change. Right. Third, for Pape, it's essential to have a local ally. For example, in the current crisis in, in Syria and Iraq, the Kurdish persh -- peshmerga in forces like this that makes it easier for the interven, intervenor to manage security after the intervention takes place. Fourth, organized international coalition. An organized international coalition, sanctioned by an international body, like the United Nations, makes the intent more clearly humanitarian. And fifth, there needs to be an extreme imbalance of power. The intervenor should be much stronger than the target, so as not to suffer very much in the intervention. Now finally and most importantly, the humanitarian intervention must have an exit strategy for Pape, that leaves behind a stable and improved peace. This provision is what is arguably holding back the United States and the Obama administration from committing ground troops in places like Syria. It is only when all three parts of the requirement are fulfilled, a mass homicide campaign, that, so it reaches the threshold of something reminiscent of genocide, a low, secondly, a low co, cost intervention, and thirdly, the a general promise, or, or, or great potential for a lasting security after the intervention is over, that humanitarian intervention is justified from Pape's perspective. This presents a higher threshold for humanitarian intervention, and may lead to a more cautious approach than an initial, sort of, gut reaction to stopping a genocide, might entail. 