 Okay, so let's talk about the Simon and Stevenson reading first. And the first thing I wanna point out is how this is an application of a set of grand strategy ideas to questions about American foreign policy in the Middle East. So go back to our prior conversation about grand strategy and you can see those arguments echoed and providing the foundations for this piece, contemporary application to the Middle East. This argument is promoting restraint or offshore balancing. The US should pull back and should not undertake a new extended military intervention in the region. So think about this with respect to larger questions motivating this module. How can international intervention limit civil war? Should the United States increase its military intervention? They would argue that the US should not increase its military footprint in the regions. And this parallels with, if you remember back, the Barry Posen reading on restraint that we examined before the midterm. The US should step back from trying to remake the region with military force if necessary, the policy that it pursued in the aftermath of 9/11. Instead they argue that the US should focus on promoting regional stability. This means giving up on political liberalization and support for democracy. Note here the implications of this argument for policy relative to Syria right now. The ejection of Assad is often linked to democratization, at least in contemporary American debates. They would argue that the US should think about giving up this goal about getting Assad out. It also means pulling back on attempts, and they emphasize this, and this was also a significant break. It also means pulling back on attempts to construct a broader peace settlement between the Israelis and the Palestinians. They argue that the US has long tried this, it hasn't been successful, it needs more moderate goals because a peace settlement is unlikely to occur there for a long time. So why do they support this pullback from the American position that's created in the aftermath of 9/11 in the Middle East? What's interesting to note about these ideas is they are not, lemme say that again, they are not nested in a belief about domestic pushback or domestic resistance to American commitments in the region, that would then make an extended military intervention in Syria unsustainable. Instead, they are arguing that there are shifting regional dynamics, shifting strategic dynamics in the region going on outside of the United States that should lead the United States to recalibrate its policy in the Middle East. So, what's changing in the region? First, remember we talked about this earlier as well, we have Shale production of oil inside the United States, and around the world for that matter. The steady supply of oil has long been a source of common interests with Saudi Arabia, and what they argue is that America's dependence on Saudi Arabia for stable oil supplies is declining, and as a consequence, this powerful source of common political interests with Saudi Arabia is also fading in importance. Second, they note that there's a shifting priority of America's allies in the region. While the United States remains focused on the global terrorist threat, Saudi Arabia and the gulf states are prioritizing the removal of Assad so as to undermine, remember Assad is tied to Iran, undermining Assad is a broader policy about containing Iranian expansion in the region. And so we see this gap opening up between the United States and its allies. Remember the United States is trying to construct a workable arrangement with Iran at the same time that Saudi Arabia and the gulf states are trying to undermine the expansion of Iranian influence. Third, they argue that America's ability to transform the region politically through military force is fading. So yes, the United States can still win conventional military victories, but as the case of Iraq has demonstrated, we have to ask what follows? It's just getting much harder to construct a stable political arrangement in a state like Syria or Iraq, with multiple ethnic and religious groups, each of which contort or veto any political settlement with armed resistance, say through terrorism. Given these growing constraints, they argue that the United States should abstain from any new extended military commitment in the region and it should reverse its policy of attempting to transform the region through military force that had been instituted after 9/11. Instead, it should return to its traditional role as an important status-quo player in the region, more like an offshore balancer. Finally, let's connect these arguments with some of the broader themes for the module. This is an argument that challenges the need for the United States to increase its military footprint or intervention in Syria. While the United States might be able to facilitate a temporary halt in the violence, it implies that a stable, lasting peace, say accelerated or aided by the United States, is unlikely. Okay, so now let's talk about and contrast these claims with those of Byman in his argument, or his paper entitled Beyond Counterterrorism. First, I think that one of the first things to point out here is that this article is a criticism of national security discourse in the United States that's occurred in the aftermath of 9/11 that lumps all groups engaged in terrorism together. That lumping together implies that a similar set of counterterrorism policies could be applied and be effective to all of these groups. Byman argues that an absence of discrimination among these groups and the strategies employed to counter them is a big mistake. So let's break down this argument by talking about a couple of the key points. First, note the variation in the organization of groups and the goals of these groups that use terrorism as a tactic in their broader political campaign. So some terrorist groups, like ISIS, Hamas, and Hezbollah, also attempt to hold territory and provide public services. They're acting like a government, acting like a state. They also engage in very conventional forms of warfare. This makes these groups, ISIS, Hamas, and Hezbollah, very different from Al-Qaeda that focuses principally on terrorist strikes. Al-Qaeda doesn't generally hold to territory and instead relies on local allies to provide sanctuaries for its fighters. Second, Byman argues that the United States is misdiagnosing the terrorist threat. He argues that the direct threat to the United States posed by terrorism x has been inflated since 9/11. Terror strikes have been rare and dramatically less damaging than the strikes associated with 9/11. Instead, terror groups pose more of an indirect threat to the United States, threatening our key allies in the region like Jordan and Israel. Now third, note the connections that Byman draws between terrorism and civil war, and this is gonna bring us back to our key concepts for today. Most terrorist groups are actually participating in a civil war. They are trying to destabilize a local government and take advantage of a political vacuum created by a failing state. This implies that the counter terrorism policies of the United States really take sides in a civil war and effectively work like an intervention in that civil war. Now, note the contrast that these claims generate with the Simon and Stevenson argument. Byman argues that the United States needs to engage in more intervention, before a civil war even occurs. These interventions could prevent civil wars that then strengthen terrorist groups. This intervention should take the form of state-building efforts that build up the capacity of security services and fosters political reform. However, and there's an important component to this argument that's slightly hidden, note that he does not argue that the United States should try to foster democracy in the Middle East. Instead, he's arguing for political reforms that should be geared towards conflict resolution first. Which means that the United States should be fostering political reform that's geared towards peace, not necessarily expanding political participation in moving towards democracy in these countries. So in sum, both of these readings address contemporary American policy in the Middle East, and they engage larger questions about American intervention in civil wars. They offer different views on these questions with Byman advocating deeper intervention around the world to support traditional allies in meshing American foreign policies into domestic politics of small countries around the world to ensure that a civil war does not occur within them that could exacerbate any terrorist problem that we face going forward. 