 ﻿1 Hello again, in this module we want to continue our conversation about the relative role of the Executive and Legislative Branches in U.S. Foreign Policy. There will be six subset segments in this module. In the first, we discuss how the Constitution endows Congress with a significant role in Foreign Policy. In the second segment, we take a look at the War Powers Act. In the third segment, I examine how Congress influences the making of U.S. Foreign Policy. As a sidebar, these segments were taped in the midst of the larger debate about whether President Obama needed additional authorization, what we describe as an AUMF, or an Authorization to Use Military Force, from Congress to continue the military campaign against ISIS, or the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, that he announced in September of 2014. This debate began in the fall of 2014, and was influenced by the upcoming elections for Congress in November. In the fourth segment, we introduce a concept called Divided Government. This situation occurs when a single, political party does not simultaneously hold the Presidency, and majorities in both the Senate and the House of Representatives. For example, Divided Government exists when there is a Democratic President, and the Republicans hold the majority of seats in both the Senate and the House of Representatives. Similarly, Divided Government exists when there is a Democratic President. The Democrats hold a majority of seats in the Senate, and the Republicans hold a majority of seats in the House of Representatives. This segment also defines Partisanship, or the grouping together of politicians into a party along ideological lines, and discusses how Partisanship can influence Foreign Policy-making in the United States. Again, these lecture segments will discuss Republican arguments about the need for a tougher military response to ISIS. The fifth segment examines another source of Congressional influence on Foreign Policy; one that rests on public statements in the media to move public opinion on Foreign Policy debates. It will include a couple of interview clips with Lindsey Graham, a Republican Senator from South Carolina. These interviews were conducted in the Fall of 2014, and the Spring of 2015. We discuss some of the arguments made in them, and note some differences in how their content changes over time. The sixth segment wraps up this discussion by showing how many of the concepts introduced over the past two modules are reflected in your assigned reading by Jim Webb, a former Senator from Virginia. In this segment, we also discuss a concept called Stealth Multilateralism that is found in the reading by Kaye. 