 When it comes to actually using military force, however, since the US has not formally declared war since World War II, it would seem that Congress does not have much roo, room for influence in actual war making, meaning use of force. However, that is not necessarily the case. The expansion of the President's power to use military through, to use the military through his role as Commander in Chief angered many in Congress and the mass population in general, particular, particularly when the missions went poorly. This dissatisfaction with presidential overreach you can call it, reached its peak in the Vietnam era, and the Congress tried to take back some authority over the deployment of armed forces through what is called the War Powers Resolution of 1973. It's also called the War Powers Act. Those are the same thing, right. This joint resolution of Congress was passed over a veto from Richard Nixon. Ricard Nixon argued the, the war powers resolution was unconstitutional because it infringed on the rights of the president to conduct foreign policy as the chief executive. Since its enactment over 40 years ago, presidents have tended to argue that it is unconstitutional, both democratic presidents, and republican presidents, or that it doesn't apply to a particular circumstance where they want to use military force without getting authorization from Congress. So, what does the War Powers Resolution say? I provide some extended quotes from the joint resolution in this flag. As you can see, the War Powers Resolution argues by interjecting Congress back into debates over when to use force, the resolution made argued that it was rebalancing. The power between the President and Congress back toward what the founding fathers intended. So their intent was to balance. Again in, in, and sort of counter this presidential over reach in their eyes. Secondly, they make their case based not only on the power to declare war which is the Constitution devoted to Congress, but also on the necessary and proper clause in which it is the Congress, not the President, that has the power to make all laws necessary and proper for carrying into execution, not only its own powers but also all other powers vested by the Constitution. This interpretation of the necessary and proper clause gives Congress broad powers over foreign policy. Now finally, and most importantly the war power's resolution lays out specific rules outlining when the President must seek authorization from Congress and when he or she has to consult Congress. It puts time limits on the President's ability to deploy troops abroad without a declaration of war or some specific Congressional authorization. When the threat of the Islamic State emerged in Iraq and Syria recently, this is what was driving the debate over what President Obama must whether President Obama must ask Congress for authorization to use force or not. As Bobby Chesney, in his interview from last lecture explained, Obama, President Obama said he does not have to ask congressional approval, because of a previous law, the authorization for use of military force, or AMUF that was passed in 2001 right after the attack on 9/11. This congressional authorization passed 14 years ago provided the President with congressional approval, right, a congressional authorization to fight Al-Qaeda. But as Professor Chesney and your reading on the AUMF from last time state, there are some real reservations, both legal and political about this legal basis for fighting a new threat in ISIS, right? IS is the Islamic State, is not Al-Qaeda. In fact, they're competitors with Al-Qaeda. And it's very different from the enemy that was the target of the 2001 AUMF after 9/11. And so the War Powers Act and these AUMF's they're controversial and it is part of this battle between Congress and the President. 