 So I wanna continue this larger conversation about how Congress shapes American Foreign Policy, by first returning to one of the bigger themes that motivates this class that we introduced on the first day of class. And one of the big questions was, how does the way we structure domestic politics, our institutions within the United States that regulate how, that regulate political competition. How do these institutions, how does the structure effect U.S. foreign policy? Over the last two classes, we've been focusing on the relationship between the executive and legislate and how does this relationship between the executive and legislative branches shapes the conduct of American foreign policy. We can see the importance of this issue playing out in public debates, that Rob just referred to, about how the United States should respond to the threat posed by ISIS. We see congressional officials publicly pressing President Obama to escalate our military actions in Iraq and Syria. And this conflict alzo, also raises important institutional and legal questions that Rob just introduced. Does the President have the authority to wage this battle without securing additional support from Congress? The point of all this is to, to argue that the institutional structure shapes, in the United States, shapes how foreign policy gets made, and so I wanna take a step back here, and briefly describe what we mean when we talk about an institution. Think of an institution as a rule, an institution is a rule. It structures how two individuals or groups with conflicting interests might interact or bargain over some social choice say, Congressional, Congressional resolution to wage war against ISIS. The rule might specify which actor say the Congress or the President has the right to declare war against ISIS, but it's important to note here that the institutions really matter when groups have competing or different interests. If everyone agrees on something, you don't need a rule to adjudicate and create a resolution to some disagreement over what to do. These rules, this division of power between the Executive and the Legislative branch, the rules to have elections for presidents every four years, these rules help to allocate the roles, responsibilities, and the rights of political actors in the bargaining situation, which means that the institution helps to allocate the relative power among these groups. And helps to determine the policy choices that emerges from interaction and bargaining among them. So in this congressional example that we have been talking about, there are a number of important rules that are shaping American policy toward ISIS right now. First, we can think of Rob's discussion of the War Powers Resolution that allows President Obama to conduct military operations for 60 days before securing Congressional authorization. The Constitution sets up a second key set of rules that shapes how the war against ISIS will be conducted. So in the fall of 2014 that Rob talked about the President argued that he didn't need additional Congressional authorization. He already had it from 2001. He did however, at the same time known, this was interesting, he extended an olive branch I think to Congress or a compromise position. He said I don't need authorization for you. But I want Congressional buy-in. So I would like you to cast a vote. For, that illustrates buy in or support for the mission by allocating funds to train soldiers in Iraq. So he was saying, I don't need you, but will be good for all of us if you show your support legally through some act of Congress for this policy. Third, we have to think about another set of institutions that are shaping the current bargaining between the President and Congress over how to confront ISIS. Elections, this played a significant role in the fall, but it's also showing up right now and we're gonna have a clip in another 40 minutes to show that illustrates this. Obviously the President is not campaigning for anything right now. However, last fall some congressional officials were engaged in tough re-election campaigns. As a consequence, they didn't wanna have to cast a tough vote on congressional authorization for war against ISIS if their district or their state was conflicted on what to do. So there's another complication for congressional officials here. What if they support a decision to go to war, and the war goes badly? They can then get punished in the next election. So think back to the complications that this dynamic posed for Hillary Clinton, when she was running for President in 2008. She had supported going to war against Iraq in 2003 while Obama had publicly opposed it. And so this gave him a wedge to separate himself in the primaries and arguably get a leg up on on, on Hillary Clinton. These, the point of all this is, these votes on the authorization to go to war can come back and haunt politicians when they're running for office in the future. Professor Chesney referred to this as the two kids in the high school dance. In his interview. They probably want to dance. However, the act of asking each other, or the risks associated with getting turned down, leads them not to dance. So, in this case, full throated Congressional support for the war against ISIS, that would be dancing. thus, in some ways, what we see in the run-ups to the decision to intervene militarily in Iraq, is really a series of sheepish glances across the dance floor between the President and Congress. Perhaps even locking eyes for a brief moment. >> [LAUGH Geez.] >> Or sending some intermediary to another intermediary to find out if the girl wants to dance. This goes on. I mean, we're making a joke here, right, but this goes on in terms of back channel negotiations between the two. Will you support this if we talk about this publicly? Will you not? Congress, in these back channel negotiations, Congress and President are to figure all of this out. But it's the rules that we've just talked about, this need to go to Congress, that really structure this process and creates these political imperatives. So, there's one final element to these, to these stories. Some of these Congressional officials that are criticizing the President for not doing more to confront ISIS might be running in 2016. This possibility changes how they publicly talk about these, these issues. It's easier to take extreme positions when you are a member of Congress representing one state like South Carolina. It's another thing to take these extreme positions when you need to win votes in swing states like Ohio and Colorado. Politicians, like the President, generally take more moderate positions closer to the political center so they can win votes from throughout the country. And as I mentioned, we're gonna see some evidence of this in these videos coming up in class. >> So let me just say that I vetoed Pat McDonnell's desire to put a Footloose clip- >> [LAUGHS] >> In right there with the whole dance scenario. He's quite a dancer. 