 Let's transition slightly here and identify a number of mechanisms by which Congress can shape the making of foreign policy in the United States. We are going to talk about two main ways, some of which we have already touched on slightly. The first focusses on the role of Congress in checking the President in foreign policy using its Constitutional powers of oversight to limit presidential action, or even embolden it if necessary. Political science research suggests,that the extent to which Congress engages in this oversight depends heavily on the presence of something we call divided government, a concept itself that rests on partisanship or party ID. So, let me start with a bottom-line statement, and then clarify what it means by pulling apart its components. Research suggests that Congress is more active in checking presidential initiative or authority in foreign policy when we have a divided government. So, what is divided government? Divided government occurs when the President's party does not hold a majority of seats in both the House of Representatives and the Senate. So, divided government is when one party controls at least one house of the legislature, and a different party controls the presidency. We exist in a situation of divided government today because the Democratic party holds the White House under President Barack Obama, but they are the minority party in the House of Representatives and in the Senate. Before talking about some of the reasons why divided government initiates more Congressional oversight over the President, let me define two key terms. First, partisanship, or party identification, and second, congressional oversight. Now, Pat's gonna be using a white board over here and distract me. >> I'm gonna try not to- >> Yeah. >> Spill my water, too. >> Good. Well, try to do two things at once, that's very difficult. >> Partisanship refers to the ideological orientation of a politician or a voter. In the United States, this is generally thought of as a single dimensional scale that is continuous, with the right side of the spectrum referring to policy positions that are associated with Republicans, and the left side of the spectrum referring to policy positions that are associated with Democrats. Because this is a continuum, it can be used to separate Democrats and Republicans in spatial terms, but also Republicans from each other and Democrats from each other. For example, Republicans in the Senate from the northeast, like Kelly Iotte, I'm hoping I said that right. >> Hopefully. : From from New Hampshire are closer to the center of this continuum between right and left than their colleagues, like James Inhoff from Oklahoma, who would be positioned farther out on the right. In short, party identification is just a way to summarize the policy preferences or the policy positions of some members of Congress or voters. Go ahead. >> Can I jump in on one thing? If we go back to the picture on the so, the, the, the y-axis here is the number of voters. And so, the idea here is that voters are normally distributed within the electorate. And so, in the, in the political center, you have more voters, tight, the number of voters on the left. As you get out to the tails, the more extreme voters, it means you have fewer voters. And so, we're just talking about presidential politics. This is one of the tendencies. If you assume that societies ideological or policy preferences are arrayed like this, where the votes, they're in the center, that's what pushes Presidents toward more moderate positions, than say the the foreign policy positions like Jim Inhofe from Oklahoma. >> Right, and so, the center is where most of the voters are, and so that's why in election, in electoral cycles that is where politicians tend to gravitate to. Depending on the election actually, because in primaries, there's a different dynamic that we'll talk about a little later. In, on foreign policy, the conventional wisdom is that Republicans tend to prefer a more robust or a militaristic foreign policy. This means that they are more willing to use military force, more willing to support an expanded American military presence around the world, are more likely to support higher levels of defense spending, and are more willing to use military force unilaterally if necessary. This conventional wisdom was prominent during the most recent Bush administration in the larger debates about the War in Iraq. The 2004 election really started to put this distinction in stark terms, as Democrats increasingly ran against Republicans on their support for the 2003 invasion. Finally, this relationship also rests on the significant role of neo-conservative ideas in shaping the policy positions of Republicans. Now to be fair, this conventional wisdom is getting challenged a bit by the emergence of the Tea Party within the Republican party. Some conservative Republicans are pushing back against these tendencies to rely more on isolationism, and getting away from all of these foreign interventions. Next, I want to provide you with some examples of what I mean by Congressional oversight. Of foreign policy. So that was partisanship, now the other, concept we need to concentrate on is con, Congressional oversight. Congressional officials can rely on their committee structure to call public hearings that discuss and debate some element of foreign policy, say a request by the President for additional defense spending to train. Iraqis to fight I-S, ISIS right. These hearings, in Congress can provide a public forum potentially covered by the news outlets for members of the opposing party to criticize the President. This public criticism doesn't just rest on the ability to hold hearings, however. Congressional officials can obviously use their access to the news media to alter public debate. Right? So congress can also, beside, so, so trying to influence the debate is one of the ways that congress, uses oversight. But congress can also pass legislation that restricts Presidential action on foreign policy. Congress can use its power to write legislation that includes limits on how these policies are executed. Let me give you an example. The Patriot Act contained what are called sunset provisions that allowed some components of this act to expire. Their expiration then forces the President to come back and get a new authorization from Congress. Forces the President to consult Congress. There is some risks here to the President. The public's or the Congress's support for this legislation could change over time. Making it quite difficult to continue the policy into the future. Similarly, Congress can shape presidential foreign policy, by telling him, the President, how to spend the money that is appropriated. This can show up in defense authorization bills, and so Pat. Take over. >> Alright. >> I've talked long enough man I'm tired. >> So let's return to the one liner that started this section. Divided government leads to more congressional oversight on foreign policy. Why? First there are some, el, obvious electoral incentives at play here. Congress can use its powers of oversight to criticize the policy in multiple forms. Either an administration execution of a policy or the broader goals of the policy. For example, Republicans could say, we need to fight ISIS, but say the president is doing a horrible job implementing a strategy that has a reasonable amount of success. We're going to see, s, an example of such a statement shortly. More importantly criticism of the president, if it has some staying power in the media and in the public, can help to enhance the electoral fortunes of the opposition party in the next election. On these grounds the current situations against ISIS presents an interesting political challenge for Republicans in Congress. On the ha, on the one hand, their preference for a robust response to ISIS pushes them closer to the President's policy, which will selectively use military force to confront the threat in Iraq and Syria. On the other hand, Congressional officials in the opposite party can't be too supportive of the president, because that would undermine their party's criticism of him that could be helpful to push more voters, their way in future elections. Thus, we are likely to consen, to continue to see mixed messages of support and criticism from Republicans in Congress. Divided government also leads to more congressional oversight of foreign policy because of the information advantage possessed by the President. As discussed in last class, the President has broad access, and this was identified as well in your web reading today. The president has broad access to streams of information. Say, from the intelligence agencies in the government that help to make better judgments about the likelihood of success of certain foreign policies. The president is more likely to share that information with members of his own party to help enlist them to build support for his policies. Consequently when possessing a majority in one of the houses of Congress, the party opposing the President will use its constitutional rights of oversight to try and offset this informational advantage. Thus they will call for hearings that force Administration officials to testify about the challenges of implementing the President's policies, and they try to raise some controversy, shine a new light on, and use the forum to criticize the President. Finally, I want to make one last point about divided government here. It has historically been an effective constraint on the use of military force by the President, and this argument that's tested in empirical scholarship, challenges some of the ideas in the web reading that you had for today And the idea goes like this. As the number of seats in Congress. Held by the party that opposes the President goes up, the President is less likely to use military force in foreign policy. So in current situation given that the Presidency is held by Democrats. These arguments hold on average, as you get more Republicans in office with a Democratic President, that President will be less likely, on average, to use military force. And this empirical relationship holds. In the post World War II period. This finding is an important corrective to another conventional wisdom that's often mentioned in American foreign policy. Namely, that politics stops at the water's edge. That claim, that phrase, implies that when it comes to issues of national security, or the deployment of military force, opposing parties rally behind the President. However, this empirical relationship that I just mentioned, suggests the opposite. Even the use of military force by the President is constrained by Congress when divided government exists. And as I mentioned note that this also contrasts with the piece that you read by Jim Webb for today. It's really critical of congressional inaction on key foreign policy issues. How would, how do we square the circle here? To be fair the data, the data that I'm discussing here covers the period from 1945 to 2000. And Webb is really focusing on the period after 9-11, criticizing Congress for inaction, and Presidents Bush and Obama, for bypassing Congress. 