 Next I want to examine another dimension of what I have described here as the practical politics of Congressional influence in foreign policy. Congressional officials can also use their positions, and this is what we were just talking about, I want to reinforce it some more, to grab the bully pulpit and influence public opinion about the President. They can do this by trying to influence how the media covers the President. Again, divided government is really important here. Congress holds more hearings about some aspect of the President's foreign policy. Hearings that are designed to criticise the President when there is divided government. Again, these hearings create public opportunities as the McCain quote just illustrated. They create public opportunities for members in Congress to voice their displeasure with the President's policy. Moreover, research has shown that the media keys off of the presence or absence of bipartisan support when covering these foreign policy debates. The presence of bipartisan support tends to diminish critical perspectives in the news. The absence of bipartisan support increases the presence of critical perspectives. Did I get that right? Yes. So, if you've got, if you have limited bipartisan support, or if you don't have bipartisan support the media focuses on the opposition party and gives them the bully pulpit. In this way, Congressional officials can help to set the agenda by which important foreign policy debates are publicly conducted. And then this gives them a vehicle by which to shape public opinion about the President's foreign policy. Obama's in a slightly better position right now, because his public opinion numbers are way up because of the economy in the last three, three months or so. So next I want to turn to a couple of videos to illustrate these dynamics. Both our interviews with Lindsay Graham, a Republican Senator from South Carolina. I'm not taking the Lindsay Graham clips from the Daily Show which are quite entertaining. Look them up on YouTube if you get a chance after class. >> You're no fun, man. >> Both of these interviews discuss the policy challenges posed by ISIS in western Iraq and Syria. Before going to the clips, though, I thought because there have been some questions about this over the last couple classes. I thought it might help to provide a little background on the current conflict against ISIS. ISIS refers to the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, which is also known as ISIL for the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. So, what I'm gonna do is take about four, five minutes to give you a little background here, and then we're going to roll two clips after we roll those clips, then we're gonna go to the survey. So ISIS is a successor organization to Al-Qaeda in the Middle East. It is first important to realize that ISIS is even more radical than Al-Qaeda, and this bears on President Obama's attempts to claim authorization from the 2001 Act by Congress. The current leadership of Al-Qaeda has publicly distanced itself from ISIS, in large part because of the extreme violence ISIS has directed against civilians. Its radicalism has made ISIS an enemy to virtually all existing states in the Middle East including Syria, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, and Iran. >> And now Jordan. >> And now Jordan. Yes. This configuration of interests is important as the United States now finds itself on the same side of this issue- With countries that often or traditionally oppose American policies. So the politics of this are slightly different than what we might expect in Middle East politics. The military power of ISIS has flourished in the Syrian Civil War. It has sought to overthrow Assad the current leader of Syria. And has been able to dramatically expand it's military capacity with the influx of foreign fighters getting drawn into this civil conflict. The policy focus in the United States on ISIS grew more intense in the Fall of 2014. Because its military began to take significant swaths of territory in Syria and Western Iraq. It now controls oil and other important resources like military hardware and dams found in these regions. Which it has used to fund further military operations. This territorial expansion has also facilitated a program of genocide in this region. And contributed to a massive refugee problem in places like Jordan and Turkey. As civilians flee torture, murder, rape, and severe restrictions on their individual freedoms. Moreover, this expansion also threatens the Iraqi state, clearly, and American interests there. In the Fall of 2014 the Iraqi army suffered significant desertions and potential collapse. As it failed to defend significant portions of western and northern Iraq from ISIS. So this rapid collapse of the Iraqi's military position provoked a new round of military intervention by the United States in the Fall of 2014. American actions have relied predominantly on air power. Bombing the positions of ISIS in western Iraq and Syria. These actions in coordination with Kurdish military organizations, have helped to slow or stop the advance of ISIS. However, these operations have not been capable of retaking territory the was already lost to ISIS. So these policies have been consistent with Obama's grand strategy that was laid out and that we discussed at West Point. He's very cautious and hesitant to commit new ground troops to Iraq or Syria. He prefers instead to rely on local armies to do the brunt of the fighting. This strategy, though, has activated significant criticism from Republicans in Congress. Some of whom have consistently advocated for the insertion of more ground troops into Iraq and Syria. We can see in these debates tension. Between the executive and legislative branches over the making and the implementation of American foreign policy. So now, finally, let's go ahead and roll these clips to illustrate this conflict. The first is going to be an interview from Fox News Sunday with Lindsey Graham, a Republican Senator from South Carolina from last Fall. >> Senator Graham, what do you say to the idea, which is exactly the flip side of your argument. That if you do make this an American fight, you will only attract more people to join ISIS. That the best way to handle this is for the indigenous forces to take back their own territory and kick these thugs out. >> Apparently, nobody's been listening to what Senator McCain and I have been saying for the last three years. We said train the Free Syrian Army so they can take this fight on. Instead of training the Free Syrian Army, the president overruled his entire national security team and abandoned the Free Syrian Army. We're talking about an army now, not an organization, 31,000 is the best guess. Holding territory in Iraq and Syria, the size of Indiana. And for anybody to suggest that we can do this with air power alone, or this is like Yemen or Somalia, is disingenuous and delusional. I want a regional coalition. I want the Free Syrian Army in the fight. I want Arab countries in the fight. But here's what I'm tired of hearing from this Administration and my friends on the other side, and within my party. That this is somehow easy and really not our fight. Name one Arab army you can put together any time soon to deal with the terrorist army of over 30,000 without a substantial American commitment. Not the 82nd Airborne, but Intelligence, Special Forces to go in there and dig these guys out. I am tired of hearing from this administration how easy this is gonna be. When it's gonna be hard and the consequences of losing my friend is if they survive our best shot. This is the last best chance to knock them out, then they will then open the gates of hell to spill out on the world. This is not a Sunni versus Sunni problem. This is ISIL versus mankind. >> well, Senator Graham unfortunately is not fired up this morning. Senator Reed, we, we have to leave it there. >> So a couple of things to point out here. Senator Graham is a little fired up. >> And I would say he's trying to- >> It's the gates of hell. >> He's trying to shift the public debate some. He's critical of the larger debate about this threat. Saying it would be incredibly difficult and require more resources than that are on the table right now. In part, he is implicitly saying that we could have a strategy destined to fail. There's direct criticism of the president, without referring to Obama's West Point speech. Graham challenges a key component of Obama's grand strategy, grand strategy. Mainly that the United States can rely on our allies to do the brunt of the heavy lifting when it comes to military engagements. He's saying that we can't just rely on air power and military training. At the same time there's almost an implicit agreement with Obama on another issue. Notice that he says there isn't an Arab country in the region that is capable of defeating ISIS right now. In a sense,too, he is suggesting, and pushing up the United States as an indispensable nation in the broader global order. So now what I wanna do is run a second clip that was from this weekend and I want you to notice the, the contrast in the tone and the style. So, let's go ahead and run the clip. >> We're joined by Republican Senator Lindsey Graham from Clemson, South Carolina. Senator, thank you for joining us. >> Thank you. >> This is now the seventh public, beheading of either a journalist or an aid worker by ISIS. When is this going to stop? >> When they're degraded and destroyed. And the President has the right goal to degrade and destroy ISIS, but he doesn't have the right strategy. An aerial campaign will not destroy ISIL. You're going to need boots on the ground, not only in Iraq but Syria. And there's got to be some regional force formed with a an American component. Somewhere around 10,000, I think, American soldiers to align with the Arab armies in the region. And, and go in to Syria and take back territory for Isis so that's what will make it stop. >> You know. >> Excuse me. >> The Pentagon admitted just last week that ISIS still holds about 20,000 square miles in Syria and Iraq. >> Right. >> That's roughly twice the size of Massachusetts. There have been 2,000 air strikes by American and coalition. >> Right. >> Forces. There were just 34 this weekend. Are these air strikes effective at all? >> They won't destroy ISIL. They do help in some regard. How do you dislodge ISIL from Syria? Iraq, you hope you can get the Kurds and the Iraqi security forces and the Anbar Sunni tribes to work together. To defeat them in western Anbra- Anbar and take back Mosul. But Syria's very complicated. You're going to need a regional force, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, the entire region, putting together an army with American people embedded. Special forces Intel folks you know forward air controllers to go into the ground. And not only dislodge them from Syria, but hold the territory and you can't do that until you deal with Assad. >> I think one of the most alarming that I've read is that of these foreign fighters. Involved in Syria and Iraq, that some 4,000 of them have Western passports. >> Right. >> Which means they could travel to the United States without a visa. Are we watching them? >> we, we are, but we're being overwhelmed, quite frankly, Syria and Iraq combined are the best platforms to launch an attack on the United States I've seen since 9/11. So everyday that goes by, we've got more terrorist organizations with more capability to strike the homeland, than any time since 9/11. You got AQAP in Yemen. But ISILs presence in Syria and Iraq, they're very rich, foreign fighters flow with passports that can penetrate the United States, or in our western allies. So you, you'll see a Paris on steroids here pretty soon, if you don't disrupt this organization and take the fight to 'em on the ground. And again you can not successfully defeat ISIL on the ground in Syria where the Free Syrian Army and regional coalition of Arab nations until you deal with Assad, cuz he will kill anybody that comes in there that tries to defeat ISIL. >> Let's turn now to politics, Senator Graham, because you announced, this week that you are considering a run for president. >> So, a couple things to point out from this clip. First, Rob, what did you notice? >> He looked like he took some I, some Xanax there to calm down, but that's just in tone. The content was pretty similar. >> Yeah. So first notice the consistency in his positions. We need more American troops. We need a regional army to fight ISIS in Syria, holding territory there, and he says the biggest threat to the American homeland today stems from the threat of terrorist attacks incubated in Iraq or Syria. He also wants Assad out of Syria. He's using his position in both the clips. He's using his position in Congress and the media to defend a policy position that would push Obama to expand America's military position in Iraq and Syria. He wants boots on the ground, something that Obama is resisting. Second, as we just joked about, note the difference here in tone and style between the two clips. Graham is much more restrained in the more recent clip, why? I think you can guess from the last five seconds of the video which I intentionally kept in there. He's thinking of running for president in 2016. What does this mean? He now has to win over more moderate voters. Consequently he can't be screaming about opening up the gates of Hell, as he did last fall. So comparing these two videos, we can see one of the reasons why Congress and the President often disagree on foreign policy. And it stems from the differences in the constituencies they represent. So when Lindsey Graham represents conservative, conservative voters from South Carolina and is not in danger of losing his senate seat, he can be much more aggressive in making bold claims criticizing the President in public. When Lindsey Graham though wants to run for president he needs to appear more presidential in public. He cannot give the impression of someone slightly disheveled, because he needs to expand the range slightly, slightly. >> He's not disheveled. >> He needs to expand the range of voters that he is capable of appealing to. So I draw this distinction to show that presidents tend to adopt more moderate foreign policy positions, that are closer to the middle of the electorate. They need to appeal to a broad coalition. Alternatively, there are gonna be a fair number of congressional officials pushing policy positions that are further from the political center. So on average we should expect your average congressional official to be further away from the political center than the president. And so it, these ideological differences that then manifest in this institutional array generate very different policy recommendations from officials in Congress, from that, in President. >> And make a quick point. >> Sure. >> So this is a great example because it's the same person wearing two different hats, right? Lindsey Graham in Congress is much more fiery. Lindsey Graham the presidential candidate much more subdued. You, you don't, you can do this for a lot different politicians on a lot of different parts of the political spectrum. If you did a side by side comparison of, of Senator Barack Obama versus President Barack Obama, you could find the, the same differences. >> Yep. >> And so it's not, you know, just specific to a Lindsey Graham, or a conservative, or liberal, it's, the point here is institution 