 One of the things that we want you to work on when you're doing these readings is thinking about the implications of the argument, so not just reading the text of an essay in terms of what it said, and trying to memorize it, but it's then to take those principles, and reason beyond the context of that article to think about contemporary policy implications, and so, in this case, that article's written in 2013, Webb is sharply critical of Congressional inaction, both in 2008, in 2012, and then again initially on the intervention in Syria, but he's gonna time this with 9/11. This reading is a broad critique of a limited Congressional role in American foreign policy, since 9/11. Now Webb is arguing that there's really an important institutional break that occurs around 9/11, in how US foreign policy is executed. Note again, this goes back to our very first day of class, how the arguments in this piece illustrates how external forces, whether we want to talk about war, terrorism, globalization, we'll do that later on in the semester, how external forces can shape domestic politics in the United States. Now, in this case, the shock of 9/11 creates the conditions for a diminished Congress with respect to the making and execution of US foreign policy. According to Webb, Congress is not fulfilling it's Constitutional policies, in the implementation of foreign policy. It's allowing the president to effectively write quasi treaties, and use military force without Congressional consultation and approval. He talks about this in the context of the strategic arrangement that's constructed between the United States and Iraq in 2008, between the United States and Afghanistan in 2012, and then again in President Obama's decision to use military force against Libya, was that 2013? I think? So similarly, Congress has allowed, so on top of these questions about the use of military force, and the construction of these multilateral arrangements, Congress has allowed the defense budget to expand significantly after 9/11, with a series of emergency appropriations that are largely separate or outside of normal Congressional debate, and resistance on appropriations. So there's lots of blame to go around here. And Webb is casting it broadly. This isn't just a story about the President taking authority, this is also a story about Congress not asserting itself. So we have an Executive Branch that's trying to work around Congress, and individual members of Congress are unprepared, he claims, to act on foreign policy when they take office. They're too busy with domestic politics, getting re-elected, and raising money for their next election. So his arguments reinforce two sets of things that have already been discussed in this module. The first is the general claim that Presidential authority expands in war time. And here, we can talk about the expansion of presidential authority, relative to Congress. Second, Webb also notes that members of Congress are unprepared to be effective voices on foreign policy when they are initially elected. This is an example of the informational advantage held by the President with respect to foreign policy that we discussed in a prior segment. On the part of Congressional officials, the implication is their uncertainty about the right course of action, because they're relatively unprepared. This uncertainty leads them to sign off or not be effective checks on presidential discretion when making important foreign policy decisions. Now finally, I want to draw a parallel here between the Webb and the Kaye readings. They both discuss the costs associated with more narrow, or I should say, unconstrained executive actions on foreign policy. Webb argues that President Bush did this with a strategic framework agreement with Iraq in 2008, and Obama did the same thing with Afghanistan in 2012. So presidents use executive agreements as a work around their dealings with Congress, so they can get the international deal done. You know I bet the Donald would like to use executive agreements, and would probably, >> He's gonna make great deals. >> Great deals. All the time. I'm just gonna get in there and get the deal done. >> He'll be huge. >> But the parallel between these two examples are important for another reason. And here I'm talking about Bush in 2008, and Obama in 2012. They suggest that something about the relationship between the Executive and Legislative branches are driving these changes after 9/11. By drawing on both the Democratic and Republican example, partly what Webb is saying is, this isn't just about Partisanship. And there's a difference there with the Kaye reading, Kaye wants to blame more Republicans in the Senate. But instead, what Webb is doing is saying we've got both Republican and Democratic Presidents, are doing the same thing here with respect to bypassing Congress. Given that Obama and Bush also did this, it's probably not something about their individual personalities, or their grand strategies more generally. Instead what's going on is it's the broader structure of the situation, foreign threats, war and the need to protect the homeland are shifting the balance of power between the President and Congress. So in other words, what I'm suggesting here is that his style of argumentation subtly says it's probably not Partisanship that's driving this change, and he's also saying it's probably not individual personality, instead we have this external shock that's shifting the balance of power between the Executive branch and the Legislative branch in a way that the Founders had not envisioned, or would probably resist. So remember that he says that members of Congress are unprepared to be effective voices on foreign policy when they come to office. They're too busy raising money, and they don't know that much about foreign policy until they get on the job. So, if Congress has this big informational disadvantage, and individual members are unprepared when coming to office, do we really want Congress exerting a strong role in foreign policy? See how there's this little contradiction in his reading. And this is one of the things that we want you to work through, and always, when you're doing these readings, don't accept the readings on face value. There's gonna be little contradictions nested within these things, he wants to say Congress needs to step up, we've got an Executive branch running rough shot over foreign policy, but at the same time, he sets up this informational story which is something that we've already talked about, that lays broader doubts about the role of Congress in foreign policy if they're simply running around raising money all the time. >> Couldn't you say that these aren't mutually exclusive? Couldn't you say that, yes, Congress should have a greater role in foreign policy, and no, they don't have any business making these decisions because they don't have any information? And that's, the remedy is, give them more information. >> Absolutely, right? And so how do you give them more information? One of the ways is greater collaboration, in the decision making process, say in the hearings process, with members of the Executive branch. And I also think that Webb is likely to push back on me, and say, "Well there might be a steep learning curve, "but once Congressional officials get into Congress, "they get serious and they learn on the job." The question is, when we have broad shifts or wave elections like we had, say, with the Tea Party, when you get a range of new members coming in that don't have a lot of foreign policy experience, does then that create potentially a gap, wherein you have kind of variation in American foreign policy? >> Right. >> Just something to think about, but it's clear, let's go back to the pre-class modules, we had you read sections of the Constitution, we talked about them in class, there's a clear Congressional role here, and we see some significant evidence, both in the readings and just observing what's happened over the last 10 or 15 years that there is a shift going on. And it's lasting beyond the immediacy of the attacks on 9/11, and the question is, what are the long term consequences, >> Right. >> or costs of this? >> Right. Okay, so we're gonna take another look at this from the perspective of the Kaye reading, and Kaye argues that there has been a recent tendency since the end of the Cold War for the Senate to reject virtually all treaties pursued by Presidents. And so, remember, the Constitution sets up a check for just the Senate to ratify Constitutions with a two-thirds majority. And what, >> You said ratify Constitutions, >> Treaties, thank you, >> It's okay, we all do it. >> ratify, (laughing) I'm just trying to make you feel better >> Thanks. >> after, you know, you've had a rough day. Now, Kaye finds this tendency to reject treaties destructive to the foreign policy making process in the United States, and it's ability to engage in multilateral efforts to solve all sorts of problems on climate change, human rights, women's rights, et cetera. The control over nuclear weapons, this blanket rejectionism, in Kaye's words, keeps the West out of all sorts of international agreements, and undermines our ability to lead in a world that is increasingly multilateral, according to Kaye, and so the Senate is holding back the United States, because it's so easy to reject a treaty, because all you need is one-third of the Congress to do so. Now for Kaye, the one saving grace in this situation is that Presidents are able to work around the obstacle of Senate rejection of treaties, in what he calls "Stealth Multilateralism". And Stealth Multilateralism essentially boils down to efforts by Presidents to work around the refusal of the Senate to pass treaties, by simply acting as though the US were part of an accord. Essentially, even if the United States is not formally bound by a treaty, it does not mean that a President cannot make decisions that follow all of the mandates of the unratified treaty. So, for example, the Senate refused to ratify the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, which called for signatory states, those how signed onto the treaty, not to test nuclear weapons. The Senate didn't ratify that treaty, and so the United States is not a signator to that. This treaty was passed in the United Nations in 1996, but the US refused to join because the Senate rejected the treaty in 1999. However, even though the US was not formally part of this treaty, every president since that time, President H.W. Bush, the first Bush, President Clinton, President George W. Bush, and President Obama, all followed the basic mandate of the treaty and maintained a moratorium on nuclear weapons testing by the United States. Under President Obama, the US even started to go to meetings of this Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, of signatory states, and provided millions of dollars of funding for the project, even though the Senate never officially ratified it. Another workaround is the non-binding agreement, which is an international agreement short of a treaty, that thus does not need Senate approval. All of these are ways of getting around what is a real source of leverage for Congress to check Presidential power, over foreign policy. So Kaye seems to advocate getting around the Senate by Presidents when necessary, through these end runs of forming international agreements without treaties that require two-thirds of the Senate to support it for ratification. This simply cuts out the Congress yet again. However, Kaye argues that such end runs can only go so far. Some problems, like climate change, require the binding commitments and long term stability that only a treaty can provide. And so, in those cases, Congress still holds some cards in the game of foreign policy. >> So, I just want to work through a couple of examples here, to illustrate some of the pros and cons associated with getting Congressional buy in, where Kaye finishes that essay. I think one of the standard examples that's held up as incentivizing presidents to work around Congress because Congress can undermine their authority internationally, is the Versailles Treaty in 1919. So President Wilson negotiates this treaty, long drawn out negotiations in Paris, the peace treaty to remake the world in the aftermath of World War I, comes home, and because he doesn't have Congressional buy in, can't get the Senate to sign off on it. There's two failed efforts to get the Senate to sign off on the Treaty of Versailles, some reservations offered, and it fails. What that effectively does is it leads to a withdrawal of the United States from European politics, and the Europeans have no confidence that the United States could uphold it's obligation according to the League of Versailles. And so, this failure of Wilson to bring Congress in, is essentially pointed to as failure of American leadership that had horrible repercussions in the 1920's and the 1930's, because the collapse of that alternative structure in Europe paved the way, or created the conditions that made it possible for Hitler and Mussolini to rise in the 20's and the 30's. So, this suggests maybe then Presidents should just work around this, and bypass them, moving around Congress, get the deal done. Get the deal done. Do anything you have to do to get the deal done. >> Right. >> But there can be some negative consequences associated with that. And one of those consequences is if you don't have Congressional buy in, if there's a concern that the President is going to ratify an agreement without Congressional or Senate approval, then other countries are concerned about making concessions to the United States, simply because, and let's talk about this in the context of Obama, so Obama does a deal over climate change, or creates a framework agreement in 2015, says we're gonna implement these things, but can't get it through Congress. What's to stop the next President, whether or he or she is a Republican or Democrat, from either, A, not implementing these series of concessions by the United States, or simply throwing the treaty out altogether? How does this shape bargaining of other countries? They become less willing to make concessions to the United States in these circumstances. I mean, you think about an environmental accord, there's some serious deal making going on here. China, developing countries are going to have to observe real restrictions that are likely to slow down economic growth, because they should be limiting the emissions associated with fossil fuels. So they've got to find alternative energy sources, this is gonna raise their costs associated with energy and propelling economic growth indefinitely into the future. There's gonna be real adjustments to this. So, why would they -- think about this from the perspective of their leaders. They cut a deal with the United States, they're gonna alienate some constituencies in their own country, say, in China, they cut a deal with the United States, get domestic backlash because the costs associated with reducing carbon emissions, and then a new President in the United States comes to office in 2017, and said, "Yeah you remember that deal that Obama struck? "I'm not gonna honor it." Now all of a sudden, that president in China, in France, in other European countries is left hung out to dry by the change in leadership in the United States. So, why is Congressional buy-in so important? If you get two-thirds of support, if you get a deal from Congress, it becomes much harder for the United States, in the future, with a new President, to back away from that deal, because you've already got a majority of Congress that signed off it, and supports it. And so this is why there are dangers associated with Stealth Multilateralism. It potentially, it can be a temporary expedient to get the deal done, but at the same time, it can have long term consequences, in that less countries are less willing, or, sorry, that other countries are less willing to make significant concessions to the United States, because they're concerned about them getting overturned in the future. So, short term might work, long term could really undermine American leadership more broadly, if the President doesn't bring Congress along in making these deals. >> So let me just add that there's a connection here between the Stealth Multilateralism that Kaye talks about in these readings, and these inter-rounds, non-binding resolutions and simply acting as though you're part of a treaty that we never ratified, and, the debate we had last time about Executive actions and Executive decisions that Obama has used in other realms, like immigration, the dynamic and the dilemmas are the same. It's easier to get something done now, because you don't have to go through Congress, but the permanence is lacking, right? The same thing can happen with a new President, in undoing all of the decisions that the previous President did. And so, what you lack in terms of, or what you gain in the short term, you lose in the long term, as Pat just said. >> Can I just give one example to illustrate this? If we think in terms of a hypothetical, if Woodrow Wilson would have integrated Congress, they would have put constraints on him, and he wouldn't have got all he wanted when he was negotiating in Paris. At the same time, if he gets Congressional buy in, the United States is much more likely to live according to the deal, any deal that's reached among European and American nations in 1919, and potentially you get a different world. And so, there are, there can be significant long term costs associated with bypassing Congress. >> Right, and this is a huge issue right now, because of how much President Obama has relied on Executive actions, right? And so, this is going to be a continuing issue as we move forward. 