 We should move on now and talk about oil. And we wanna discuss the larger political consequences of oil and its concentration in the Middle East. But before we do that, we wanna setup this conversation by identifying some of the key attributes of this unique energy res, resource and its market. So the first thing to point out is how significant oil is as a source of energy to the world. Currently nearly 90% of all energy consumption comes from three sources, oil, natural gas and coal. Now oil is the most important of the three, accounting for about one-third of total global energy consumption and about 37% of energy consumption in the United States as of 2013. To the extent that we cannot significantly rely on candles or solar power to heat our homes and power our cars and planes, oil is an absolutely central component of modern economic activity and growth. Quite simply, countries don't grow wealthier without access to oil. Now oil is also critical to global trade. It accounts for about 15% of all global trade flows. And about two-thirds of all oil that's produced is exported so that it can, so that it then can be bought by some foreign actor. Now oil price shocks, as you have undoubtedly experienced and we're in the middle of one right now, possess a significant qua, consequences for economic activity. When oil prices go up shartly, sharply, the cost of pretty much everything goes up as well. It becomes more expensive to operate your car. Take a plane, heat your home, ship goods around the country, grow food and raise livestock. Alternatively, when oil prices collapse as they did in the fall of 2014, this oil price collapse, collapse, acts as an income boost to oil consumers which we all are, because they now have more money leftover to buy other things. Now, the 1970s illustrate how such price shocks can impose real economic pain on a society or group of countries. Two rounds of oil shocks, one in 1973 that quadrupled the price of oil in about three or four months, and another associated with the Iranian Revolution imposed a decade long period of stagflation on the developed world. Now stagflation was a term coined to characterize a situation in which there was a significant drop in economic growth coupled with high levels of inflation. So you can think about it in this way. Workers in a period of stagflation faced a double whammy. The slow down in economic activity made it more likely that they would lose their job, and at the same time, the cost of live, living were accelerating due to inflation. So in the 1970s, the jump in oil pushed prices up more generally with inflation rates topping 10% in many developed countries, annual inflation rates topping 10% in many developed countries. Now compare these numbers with the price changes today. When inflation has consistently hovered around 2% since inflation was choked off in the United States in the early 1980s. So huge differences compared to the 1970s versus 2015. Now more broadly, these economic shocks associated with the, the explosion in oil prices in the 1970s effectively transferred massive amounts of wealth from the developed world to the oil exporting countries. Now this transfer and the inability of the United States or Europe to do anything about it, raised big questions about the collapse of American post war leadership that were accentuated by disas, disastrous Vietnam War. So in the 1970s big conversations about is America declining and collapsing. Now, I raise this issue because we are going to see at the end of class today. How the identification of new sources of oil in the United States are similarly prompting conversations about the resurgence of American power and influence. So, US energy independence could be accelerating or extending American hegemony around the world 