 The first thing I want you to take away from this discussion is a very important point. There is a single interconnected global market for oil, which is composed of spot markets in which oil is physically traded in future markets in which the right to take delivery of oil at a certain point in time is exchanged. So don't think of the existence of a market for oil in the United States that is distinct from the market for oil in Saudi Arabia, China, or Europe. One world market for oil, remember that. One world market for oil. Now effectively what this means is production decisions in Saudi Arabia in the fall of 2014, matter for you and me because it shapes how much it's gonna cost for us to pay for a gallon of gas at at the gas station. Single world market for oil. Now, this pos, this reality, should temper some of your optimism about the benefits accruing from energy independence, which would be the ability of the United States to source all of its oil consumption domestically. Even if this condition were to emerge. And right now we're about 7 million barrels of oil production per day away from that possibility. So even if this condition would emerge, it would not insulate the United States from oil shocks in the Middle East because the prices, the price of oil in the United States would still be set in this single global market for oil. For example, if some production were to go offline in Saudi Arabia, the global supply of oil would fall, pushing up prices for oil pumped from the Bakken in western North Dakota, or from Eagle Shale in Texas, Eagle Ford in Texas. So currently, the world is consuming about 90.5 or so million barrels of oil a day. The US is responsible for about 21% of this consumption, but as the slide that's up now shows, this is a pretty significant change over the last decade. American consumption is down about 700,000 barrels per day in the last 12 years. So, as you might have guessed, oil prices in the single global market are determined by the intersection, intersection of global supply and global demand. Now the growth of oil prices up through the great recession, which we're gonna time at the start of nine, of 2008. So the growth of oil prices, up until then, was driven in large part, by an explosion of demand for oil in the developing world. Now, over the past three or four years, these price spikes have been offset by an explosion of the supply of oil in North America. It has now got even Saudi Arabi nervous. Now on the whole, the demand for oil is not very elastic. So what's elasticity? This means that the price of oil is, sorry, that the quantity of oil consumed is not very responsive to large price swings. So for example, if oil prices were to jump up by 25%. Consumption will fall off by significantly less than 25%. Now this is because there are relatively few substitute goods for oil at a similar price. It's simply costly to switch to an alternative supply of energy at least in the short run. So you can see this in the following example. So imagine that you're a soccer mom in the Dallas suburbs and that you're using a big SUV to get arong, around. And let's think what's going on in 2001, or 2000, 2001 before the price, oil price shocks. So, you bought this SUV in 1998, when oil prices were around $15 a barrel and you could buy gas for $0.80 a gallon. Now fast forward to 2004 when oil is $80 a barrel and you have to pay $100 to fill up your tank, the tank of your SUV every three days. What are your choices here in 2004? Buying a smaller car could save you money, but the problem is the, the price of your SUV has fallen, and you still probably have a carload of kids that you gotta drive around. You could cut your commute time by moving closer to your job But that would mean selling your house and probably buying a more expensive house that is closer to downtown. The point of all this is to illustrate that you will probably just decide to pay the higher cost of gasoline. You're gonna complain about it and complain about it to your politicians, but you probably won't change your spending behavior. So, over the last 10 to 12 years, the growth of demand for oil in the developing world and the BRIC countries, Brazil, India, Russia, and China, have played an important role in the sustained growth of oil prices. Now, your slide is gonna show you how this demand has increased. I want you to pay particular attention to China. It has accounted for over half of the growth in global oil production in the last decade, during a time in which demand has fallen in the developed world. Now we're gonna talk about this in upcoming units, but think about the implications of these figures for future attempts to get some type of global environmental deal that cuts carbon emissions and simultaneously requires a cut in oil consumption. Now, the developed world, the United States and Europe, has already begun positioning themselves to cut consumption. And this was helped in part by the great recession, so they're in a better position to meet any targets because they've already cut their current consumption. Now, China on the other hand has gone in the opposite direction. Fueling economic growth, literally with an explosive growth in the demand for oil and for coal. Now, this suggests that the developed world is probably going to have to compensate the developing world, countries like China, significantly if it really wants China to curb its emissions and cut its consumption of say, oil and coal. >> All right. So, what I am going to do today, right now, is I'm going to offer a bit of a different perspective on the inelasticity of the demand of oil, from my own experience, to kind of reiterate some of the points that Pat just made about how difficult it is for individuals to change their behavior in light of changes in the price of a good or a product like oil. So, think back, you guys are young so you can't remember this, but in one of the summers of the early 2000s, I was much younger, and I think it was about 2003 or 2004. But I'm old, so I was already working here at UT. And I was driving into campus everyday to teach summer school in the first five week session. So I'm coming in from Round Rock which is quite a hike. And the low price of gasoline at that time was starting to go up, substantially. So, for years gasoline was well under $1.50 a gallon, and then beginning in around 2003, it started to rise, and it first went from $1.50 to $2 a gallons. And then, it came close to $2.50 a gallon. So, this was a substantial increase. And, there were these new stories all about the price of filling up huge SUVs as Pat pointed out. And so, my commute from Round Rock, lovely Round Rock, let's just say, it started to be much more costly. And then a staff member in our office told me about this express bus that ran from Tech Ridge, which is up in north Austin, just right off I-35, went down I-35, the same route I was taking in my cars. Well, sitting in my car stopped on I-35. And it went nonstop and dropped its passengers literally across the street from the Brazos parking garage that I was using. So I checked it out once and found out that it was not only nonstop and was right along my route, but it was also free for UT students and faculty, and free always works well for me. If you ever want to try to sell me on anything free is what you should lead with, right? So, once I found out that the buses also had wi-fi, and I could check my e-mail and just sit there and let someone else drive, I was finally sold. And so, I started taking the bus to work. I drove to the Park-n-Ride on Techridge, and then I got on the bus and took the bus down, and it saved me a ton of money, which was the biggest reason I took the bus. But, it also made me feel superior when talking to colleagues like Pat McDonald who would say, you take the bus, like I'm some lame person who doesn't have a car or something. And I would say, I'm reducing my carbon footprint, thank you, and walk away. He felt terrible. And so, but also at times it made me feel stupid and pathetic when, of course, because I always cut things too close, I'd be walking to the said bus from my office, and it would start to drive away and I'd run after it like, oh, it was a bad picture. So I did love riding the bus rather than driving on I-35 and I took the bus pretty faithfully for years, since 2003 until this past year. I stopped taking the bus and I now drive in and sit with all the other folks, you know, ruining the earth on I-35. Why? Now the price of oil is low now. Or lower, right? And hence, the price of gasoline has dropped, but that is not why I stopped caring for the environment and driving an I-35. I stopped taking this fine express bus that was free for me because it simply no longer fit in to my schedule. I became the chair of the Government Department, and I had to get here early in the morning. But then also more importantly, because of other situations, my wife got a full time job, I had to pick up my son a few times during the week from his middle school at 3:30 p.m. And that express non-stop bus didn't start running until after that. And, I tried to take that new 801 bus, but I hated it. And, it was slower, and it always made me late. And then, people started yelling at me at home, and so I didn't. So, why am I telling you this story? It's not, well it proves two things, right? The first lesson is, once again, my kids are costing me money, and you are costing your parents money everyday. And you should know that. >> But besides that, it proves the inelasticity of the demand for oil and gas. It took 70% price hike plus a free nonstop express bus with Wi-Fi that fit my schedule, for me to even consider not driving down to campus. And as soon as any one of those elements stopped to being in effect, when it didn't fit my schedule anymore, no matter what the price was, I started driving again. That is a product that. Doesn't lend itself to quick responses to price changes 