 Now let me move on to another important take away point from this discussion. We are in the midst of a real revolution in oil production, one centered in North America. There has been a huge growth in production capacity in the United States generated by technological breakthroughs, which have made it cost effective to extract oil from shale formations. These breakthroughs were prompted in large part by the limited investments in oil exploration and development in the world from the mid 1980s until shortly after 9/11. The relatively low price for oil during this time limited the incentives for significant investments that could expand production capacity. But the wars in Iraq coupled with the destabilizing threat of terrorism in places like Saudi Arabia, and the growth of demand for oil in the developing world have helped to push prices up and reverse these investment trends. The slide posted now gives you some sense of these significant changes in production capacity. OPEC remains the key supplier in the world, accounting for about 40% of daily oil production. OPEC countries also possess about 80% of the world's proven oil reserves. Russia is the third largest producer of oil on a daily basis, and note, though, the United States. It is now the largest producer of oil in the world, and much of this growth is fueled by what has been happening in North Dakota and Texas relative to extracting oil from shale formations. So in short, 9/11, terrorism, and the war in Iraq helped to dramatically increase the market price for oil. For the most part, this had bad consequences for the US economy and national security because those countries that had lots of oil were not very friendly to the United States, Russia in particular. However, the dramatic rise in oil prices also contributed to the economic incentives that have produced this latest energy boom in North America by helping to stimulate investments in technology that are capable of getting at hard to reach oil and natural gas. That energy revolution has created an economic boom in various places in the US, including Texas, and has had ripple effects that will then have far reaching economic effects. It has lowered the global price for oil, which has substantially harmed the economies of some of America's adversaries like Russia and Iran. The shale revolution has prompted lots of manufacturing, some in the chemical sector, to return to the United States because of lower energy costs for both oil and natural gas, and the shale revolution has also increased the perceived and real international strength and leverage of the United States. Higher levels of oil production here could potentially reduce the political and economic dependence of the United States on Middle Eastern suppliers. And the shale revolution also carries the potential for much less desirable effects on the environment and certain communities as the environmental costs of hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, are fully realized. 