 Okay, let's talk about a little bit now about one of the unique attributes of the global market for oil. Because the largest known supply of reserves are concentrated in a few countries in the Middle East, this creates the opportunity for the manipulation of global oil prices by the largest supplying countries and firms. The members of OPEC, or the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, are listed on the slide. They have regular meetings in which they negotiate production quotas among themselves. These production quotas are designed to control the supply of oil released from these countries into the broader global economy. By controlling supply, the cartel enables OPEC to influence prices. If they release more oil, they can push prices down, or if they restrict oil sales, they can push prices up. They don't always want to push prices up though because, Saudi Arabia in particular, recognize that this can create a backlash from the developed world, spurring conservation and new investments in discovery. And the members of OPEC don't necessarily want to push prices down as they depend heavily on oil sales for revenues. Since the early 1990s, OPEC has often tried to stabilize oil prices. More generally, OPEC's biggest effect on global markets in the period from the mid 1980s until 9/11 was its limited investment in new production capacity. This helped to contain total global supply, which then helped to push oil prices up from 2001 to 2008. On a more short term basis, OPEC only functions effectively when the countries within it agree to restrict their oil production. This restriction decision, though, is subject to a collective action problem. Imagine that oil is selling for $50 a barrel, and that Iran's quota is 2 million barrels of oil sold on a daily basis. If Iran sells another 50 thousand barrels in a day, it is likely to have a limited impact on global oil prices. At the same time, those extra sales generate for Iran an additional $2.5 million a day in revenues. That, though, would be free-riding and it creates a powerful incentive for countries within OPEC to do the same thing, to violate their production arrangements. Moreover, if everyone in OPEC did that same thing as Iran in this scenario, total global oil supply might increase by say 400 thousand barrels a day, and that would then have a significant impact on global oil prices, pushing them down because supply had jumped up so significantly. If everyone within OPEC was a free-rider then, the group as a whole would face declining total revenues because global oil prices would get pushed down so far. Because it has the highest production capacity, Saudi Arabia is really critical to the preservation of any production, sharing, or production quota arrangements within OPEC. Saudi Arabia is known as the swing producer. This means that Saudi Arabia alters its own production levels to influence global prices and ensure that other members of OPEC uphold their quota obligations. Saudi Arabia can do this because it possess excess production capacity. This means that Saudi Arabia does not operate at full production volume daily. Instead, it ramps up production when it needs to. This excess production capacity separates Saudi Arabia from other members of OPEC that generally produce, or try to produce, at close to their full capacity. Okay, so how does Saudi Arabia influence politics from within OPEC, and, as a consequence, global oil prices? Saudi Arabia often pressures countries within OPEC to maintain their production quotas or they threaten to launch a price war to force other countries to honor their commitments when it looks like they're violating them. For example, Saudi Arabia did this against Iran in the 1980s. Iran was cheating on its quotas to try and generate more sales revenues so that it could fight the war against Iraq. Saudi Arabia responded by increasing its own production, which effectively flooded the global market for oil and then drove its prices down. Because Iran was already producing near its production capacity at this time, this fall in oil prices had dramatic negative consequences on total Iranian revenues from oil. Iran opted to quickly fall in line, making the decision to limit their own production in response to the actions or the price war initiated by Saudi Arabia. Now, Saudi Arabia did something similar in the fall of 2014. The growth in shale production in the United States has pushed up global oil supply and pushed oil prices down globally. Rather than cutting back production by OPEC to try and prop up global oil prices, Saudi Arabia pushed OPEC to maintain production levels in the fall of 2014. Now this relatively constant OPEC production combined with increased shale production to increase global supplies of oil and then push oil prices down. Saudi Arabia did this initially to preserve its share of sales in the total global oil market, and as part of this attempt to preserve its market share, Saudi Arabia is also trying to push American shale producers out of business and into bankruptcy. The idea here is that lower oil prices will hurt American firms that have borrowed lots of capital to expand production in the last five or six years, often under the assumption that oil could be sold at higher levels than at current prices. The long term challenge, though, to Saudi Arabia in the implementation of this new price war, of the strategy, is that American producers are not in OPEC. And while some of these producers might be driven out of business now, there's no reason that new American firms can't reenter the market and take over shale production when oil prices creep up again. In the spring of 2016, Saudi Arabia reversed its position and began to push other members of OPEC for a production sharing arrangement that would cap production levels at approximately those that existed in January of 2016. The biggest challenge, though, to any agreement now is Iran. Iran's production had been limited by the sanctions regime that had been led and imposed by the United States in response to Iran's nuclear program. The agreement, though, with the United States to halt that nuclear weapons program freed Iran to export its oil, and as a consequence, Iran has sought to increase its output levels significantly, further heightening the difficulties of reaching a sustainable cooperative arrangement within OPEC to restrict production levels and try and push prices up. 