 This segment briefly examines some of the broader geopolitical consequences of the shale oil boom in the United States. This transformation in the global structure of oil production threatens the long term viability of OPEC, it opens up the possibility that the United States could be energy independent over the next 10 or 20 years. This would mean that the United States sources all of its energy from domestic producers rather than imports from the Middle East. This domestic sourcing has already begun to shift the political interests of the United States in supporting regimes like Saudi Arabia and Kuwait that are so crucial to global oil production. Quite simply, the US might have less strategic need to defend these countries if it no longer relies on them to supply its oil. The downward trend in oil prices since 2014 is also putting pressure on economies dominated by oil exports. The governments of these economies face growing budget difficulties and the risk of increasing public dissatisfaction with their regime due to such economic challenges. Now, we are going to watch a brief video from Voice of America that talks about some of the geopolitical consequences of shale production in the United States, and then we are going to come back and talk about these issues in more detail. So let's run the clip from Voice of America now. >> The International Energy Agency describes a US supply shock rippling through world oil markets. John Mitchell is an oil market analyst at the Policy Institute Chatham House in London. >> The key to it is the resurgence of shale development in the United States. It has been building up for some years, but only in the last three years has it reached big proportions. >> Shale oil and gas is extracted using pressurized fluid to blast the product out from the rock, a process known as hydraulic fracturing, or fracking. Some US states and European countries have banned the practice over fears that it may cause pollution and even earthquakes. Despite their controversy, the technology will help the United States become largely self sufficient in oil by 2035, according to the IEA. US gas production is expected to overtake Russia. John Mitchell believes the concept of energy security will soon no longer dictate US foreign policy. >> Well, the Middle East will still be so dependent on US military support and the answer is probably yes. Maybe the US doesn't have quite the same interest in that as it did before. >> A more energy, self sufficient US could have dramatic implications for Middle East politics. Christopher Davidson of Britain's University of Durham wrote the book After the Sheiks, The Coming Collapse of the Gulf Monarchies. >> [inaudible] likely to see is the US start to hedge its positions a bit better on the gulf monarchies. >> In Bahrain, a gulf ally of the US, an Arab Spring type revolt has erupted periodically since 2011. Davidson says many oil rich gulf monarchies are trying to pacify their populations with government handouts to prevent those revolts, but falling receipts from oil exports could trigger political upheaval. >> Within just a couple of years, we'll have public spending deficits in most of the gulf monarchies. At the same time, we're also seeing that the demonstration effect of the Arab Spring in Syria and in North Africa starting to embolden the people of these countries that are no longer willing to tolerate autocracy. >> Davidson says over the coming decades, the gulf states will increasingly gear their oil exports eastward. >> However, what's missing is the security relationship that the western powers have historically provided to the gulf. The gulf states know, and I suspected bluffing, that China and the Pacific Asian states cannot replace the west as this ultimate security guarantor. >> Analysts say the oil boom will give the US economy a competitive advantage with cheap energy supplies no longer vulnerable to global geopolitics. Henry Ridgewell, [inaudible] News London. >> Okay, I want to emphasize a few things in this discussion. First, before we get into the geopolitical consequences of shale oil, we need to reinforce the reality here that your interaction with the American economy, your ability to find and hold a job, your cost of living depends critically on developments around the world. This is a global economy. When the Saudi government decides to hold production levels constant to preserve its market share and drive shale producers in the Balkan, in North Dakota, and the Eagle Ford oil fields in Texas out of business as it did in the fall of 2014, this can have a tremendous impact on your daily life. It is now cheaper to fly, cheaper to drive, cheaper to ship goods from everywhere in the world, and cheaper to heat your home than it was two years ago. The American consumer has gotten wealthier because of cheaper oil. This globalized world affects you on a daily basis. Second, this drop in oil prices and growth of American shale production carries the potential to destabilize governments that rely on oil to fund public expenditures. Many of these governments are in the Middle East, and some of them are allies of the United States. In some ways, then, the shale oil boom raises the risks of further domestic political instability in the Middle East if oil prices continue to hover in the $40 range. Some estimates indicate that countries like Russia and Iran required oil prices of around $100 a barrel to preserve government spending at levels seen in 2013 or 2014, and thus the low oil prices are going to be a serious problem for these countries. Third, American energy independence might also transform its political interests in the Middle East. In many ways, the Middle East has been the strategic pivot of the world since the resolution of the German problem in Europe in the mid 1960s. The United States and the Soviet Union competed there for influence throughout the remainder of the Cold War. And the United States has fought multiple wars there since the end of the Cold War, why? Whether politicians want to admit it or not, the centrality of oil to the health of economic activity in the United States creates a strategic demand to ensure that stable flows of oil are sold from these countries. President George H.W. Bush was fairly transparent in saying that the United States had to consider going to war against Saddam Hussein in 1990, in the first Gulf War, because it feared the costs associated with Saddam's control of at least a quarter of the world's oil supply by conquering both Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. This need to preserve stable oil markets also lies behind America's contradictory relationship with Saudi Arabia. On the one hand, the United States fights wars to preserve Saudi Arabia's independence. But on the other hand, it has promoted a political agenda in the Middle East, namely democratization, that clearly challenges the Saudi regime. However, all of this could change if greater oil production in the United States reduces the world's dependence on Middle Eastern oil to preserve stability in global oil markets. A reduced dependence might limit the need of the United States to hold military positions throughout the Middle East and to fight wars to defend its oil producing allies there. And think about this in the context of President Obama's pivot to Asia, and Saudi Arabia's recent assertiveness in Yemen that is designed to confront growing Iranian influence there. Obama is trying to redirect American resources and political capital away from the Middle East and toward East Asia. And Saudi Arabia is worried that the United States might just be divesting itself a bit in the Middle East, just as Iran is growing stronger. Consequently, Saudi Arabia has escalated its confrontation of Iran and has begun to prepare itself for the political possibility that it might not be able to count on the United States in the future as much as it had in the past. Most importantly, these shifts in geopolitics are being influenced by technological changes in how oil is brought to the market. Oil is a key strategic resource that shapes how the United States interacts with the world. 