 So you have a reading today by Michael Levi that addresses the current global market for oil and the role that Asia plays in determining the price of oil on the world market. Now the first major takeaway from this article is to see it as a sort of corrective to the conventional wisdom that recent trends in global oil prices are shaped primarily, or even exclusively, by US shale oil production. Levi acknowledges that the sharp increase in oil production in the United States has significantly affected global oil prices. But he argues that another major factor has been the demand for oil from Asia. Levi argues that a dramatic increase in demand for oil from Asia, particularly China, was a huge factor in the run-up of the price of oil in the first part of the 2000s. By 2008, the price of oil shot up to over $100 a barrel. In the midst of such high oil prices, the shale oil revolution in the United States took off, in part because of the huge profits that could be made drilling for oil. But then the price of oil plunged. In June 2014, it was $110 per barrel. And by January 2015, it fell to under $50 per barrel, and dropped even further to a low of under $30 a barrel recently. It is right now just hovering around $40 a barrel. This roller coaster volatility has had huge economic effects in oil-producing states around the world, and also right here in Texas as you can see in huge layoffs in Houston and other places, due to the problems with oil prices driving out, or reducing significantly, the shale oil production that was blooming just a year or so ago. Now, the conventional wisdom is that oil prices dropped suddenly because of the shale oil production in the US, plus -- as Pat just summarized -- decisions by OPEC and Saudi Arabia not to cut production to stabilize the price. Instead they engaged in this price war to try to maintain market share and drive new shale oil producers in the US out of the market. The combination of those actions produced the oversupply of oil on the world market that keeps the price very low even today. So what Levi adds to this story is the following: He argues that the conventional wisdom is not wrong necessarily, but it is missing a crucial piece of the puzzle: the demand for oil from Asia. At the same time that OPEC and the US were producing enormous amounts of oil and putting it on the world market, the demand for oil from Asia dropped suddenly. According to Levi, in 2013; the demand for oil in Asia fell by half and has stayed at that level in 2014. And so there was an economic slowdown in Asia, particularly in China, that helped to contribute to this decline in the demand for oil. This decline in the demand for oil in Asia made the glut of oil on the world market that much worse and that much more likely to severely drive the price down further than it would have gone. What Levi argues is that if Asian demand for oil stayed stable over the last few years, rather than getting cut by half in 2013 and staying that way. Then the scenario would have looked much different. Oil and OPEC and the US and others could have produced their record amount of oil, and the price would not have bottomed out under $50 per barrel. Instead, they could have produced all this oil at these enormous profits that they were enjoying in the mid-2000s, from 2008 to about 2013. And so if that would have happened, if Asian demand for oil would have stayed stable rather than slowing down severely, we would be looking at a very different kind of oil market right now. In Texas, in oil producing states from Saudi Arabia and all the OPEC states to Russia, Nigeria, et cetera. So, this article simply adds another factor to the explanation for the drop in oil prices. But what does it mean for the future? Well, Asian demand for energy will also have very important implications on many fronts. Levi argues that US security interests are being affected by this very factor, this vacillation in demand for energy because of potential regional conflicts in key shipping lanes for oil like the South China Sea. And so the competition for influence between China and the US over islands in these shipping lanes in the South China Sea in these man-made islands that China is doing has a lot to do with the transport of oil, and a lot to do with how the oil market will be shaped by Asia. And it's also the case according to Levi that America's pivot to Asia, even though it has been made possible by the potential for less dependence on oil from the Middle East, allowing the US to shift its attention elsewhere, is also driven to sort of an attraction to having a greater role in Asia because of these important energy concerns there. Now Levi also talks about the rising importance of US natural gas exports and how these exports are going to affect economics and politics in Asia. And so there's another aspect to this, and natural gas could play a big role in some of the challenges of global climate change as well in that region. But most importantly what Levi argues is that global efforts to combat global climate change are dramatically affected by Asia's demand for oil and its reliance on coal. The United States has attempted to take the lead in recent climate change talks. But it's very clear that no significant control over carbon emissions worldwide is going to happen unless Asian countries, particularly China and India, reduce their emissions. And right now that's largely driven by their incredibly large coal consumption, but it will have a dramatic impact on some of the changes in the oil market as well. So in short, what this article argues is that Asia matters, dramatically. And of course it matters in a lot of different realms, but what Levi adds to this is it matters in the energy market, which is often not a common point of conversation. Asia's energy consumption patterns will determine the impact of the US Shale/Oil production. If Asia's demand for oil goes up dramatically then there will be even greater markets for this new production of US oil. If it goes down dramatically, then the impact and the swing that shale oil has on the oil markets will be affected as well. 