 In this module, we are going to cover my favorite period in U.S. foreign policy, the Cold War. So let's get to it. The first segment starts with a description of George Kennan's view of the Soviet threat and the development of containment as a centerpiece of U.S. foreign policy. George Kennan was a State Department official that characterized the Soviet threat and defined the mission of containment. We present containment as the grand strategy of the United States during the Cold War. You can think of our prior discussion of isolationism, offshore balancing, liberal internationalism and primacy as describing the spectrum of grand strategy alternatives in the post-Cold War world. Everything after 1989. For those of you that might have questions about grand strategy debates across these two eras, you might want to think about the Cold War strategy of containment as blending elements of offshore balancing and liberal internationalism. And, to be fair, the relative importance, or emphases of these two grand strategy types in containment really varied from presidency to presidency. The second segment examines key stages in the escalation of the Cold War following World War II. It discusses the Truman doctrine, the Marshall plan, and the series of crises from 1948 to 1950 that culminate with the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950. After that, we discuss the Cold War conflict in Europe. This conversation focuses on something called the German problem, providing a brief historical overview of the challenges posed by a united Germany in central Europe. The post-World War II fate of Germany really stood at the heart of the first half of the Cold War. The Soviet Union worried that American efforts to rebuild the German military and economy would threaten the security of the Soviet Union and its sphere of influence in Eastern Europe. At the same time, the United States felt it needed a strong Germany to shoulder some of the costs and responsibilities associated with countering the Soviet threat to Western Europe. You should think of this section as motivated by a few questions - what is the German problem, how did it contribute to the Cold War, and how was it resolved? The fourth segment moves our discussion of the Cold War away from Europe to the Third World. It asks why was containment easier to execute in Europe than outside of Europe? The fifth and final segment on the Cold War focuses on the role of Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev in ending the Cold War. 