 We ended on Thursday, talking about why the war time cooperation between the United States and the Soviet Union, that was responsible for defeating Nazi German, Germany disintegrated so quickly after World War II. As we noted last time, it was not clear at that time that the next big Foreign Policy challenge for the United States was going to be the Containment of Communism. Instead, there were many who thought that the United States and the Soviet Union could come to some sort of an understanding. And continue cooperation or at least avoid outright confrontation in the immediate aftermath of World War II. So into this environment enters George Kennan, who in 1946 was the Deputy Head of the US mission in Moscow. In a document that became known as the Long Telegram, Kennan would define the nature of the Soviet threat for those in power in Washington, DC. Based on this definition of the Soviet threat, the United States would build a containment strategy, which would serve as the pillar of American Foreign Policy throughout the Cold War. So Kennan wrote this Long Telegram in February of 1946. He would later publish a version of this document in Foreign Affairs, under the pseudonym X. A reprint, of which was assigned for class today. So what was the nature of the Soviet threat for Kennan? He had two main points. First, Kennan argued that the Soviet Union would be persistently antagonistic towards the United States and its allies. For Kennan the nature of the Soviet regime, its Marxist ideology, and its need for an external enemy would always make it an adversary. Enemy, or we should say enemy of the United States as long as it remained a Communist state. So the first point that Kennan established was that the United States needed to give up any hope for a renewal of the war time alliance with the Soviets or some other sort of negotiated settlement with that regime. Any behavior resembling cooperation coming from the Soviet Union, should be taken as a strategy to buy time to rejuvenate and increase the Soviet's power, in preparation for a future conflict. In the words of Kennan, the Soviet Union was innately antagonistic towards the United States and its allies. Hostility towards the West was part of the DNA of that regime. Second, for Kennan, the Soviet Union was a special kind of threat that was very different from Hitler and the threat of Nazi Germany. Hitler wanted war and was actively aggressive. The Soviet Union, on the other hand, did not want war. It was far too week from World War II to directly confront the United States in the aftermath of World War II. Because its ideology taught that its system was on the right side of history, the Soviet regime could be patient and not afraid to temporarily retreat. Kennan argued that the Soviet threat was expansionary but cautious. He argued that the Soviet Union was like water. It would flow wherever it was allowed to flow and fill up every nook and cranny available to it, but if it finds unassailable barriers in its path, it accepts these philosophically and accommodates itself to them. The main thing is that there should always be pressure. Unceasing constant pressure toward the desired goal. So to recap, the Soviet threat was unique in Kennan's eyes. Persistent but patient, expansionary but cautious, always prob, probing and applying pressure but willing to retreat in the face of overwhelming counter force. What was so important about this definition of the threat from Kennan, was it called for a very specific strategy that matched the nature of the threat containment. If one faced a threat that was like water that would flow wherever it was allowed to flow but could be turned back by obstacles then the proper strategy was vigilant containment of the threat. To provide it reasons to retreat and never any incentives to probe the resolve of the United States. >> Okay. So, why was the Soviet Union, this way, why was it innately and persistently antagonistic toward the United States, and why was it ex, expansionary, but cautious? Kennan offered two reasons for this type of Soviet behavior. Fist he argued that the Soviet Union's ideology, Marxism-Leninism, both demonized the United States, which caused the innate antagonism, and also provided Soviet leaders with patience. This patience was based on a central assumption of Marxism-Leninism. That Capitalism would in, in, inevitably fail because of its gross inequality. Ultimately, the working classes within capitalism would rise up in revolution to overthrow the system, and establish a worker's state, according to Marxism and Leninism. In the view of Soviet leaders, time then was on their side. And so they could be patient. Second, Kennan argued that the authoritarian system established by, by Vladimir Lenin in 1917 and solidified, and intensified by Joseph Stalin. His successor required an external enemy, to justify the centralization, the extreme centralization of power and coercion that was found in the system. Internal enemies were eliminated. Early on in Soviet history, and so Soviet leaders, according to Lenin, needed to lean on the idea that external enemies in the form of capitalist encirclement demanded that the Soviet state remained vigilant, centralized and authoritarian. Now one final point about Kennan that can be characterized by the long quote on your slide. Kennan argued that the United States could not, and let me repeat this, could not defeat the Soviet Union at that time militarily. And would not be able to, in the foreseeable future. Instead, what Kennan argued was that he saw the Cold War as an extended conflict that would stretch over years, or even decades. Containment- This strategy, that was the basis of U.S. Foreign Policy, then was aimed at wearing down the Soviet Union by keeping it from expanding. And this is what Kennan, arguably, predicted way back in the 1940's. And I quote here, then, the end of the X article on this slide, to help bring home the point. In Kennan's view, the Soviet system could not survive over the long term if it did not expand. It would ultimately implode from within due to its own internal contradictions. And, so, in order to prevail in this long-term conflict, the United States and it's political and economic system, according to Kennan, simply had to out-perform the communist system of the Soviet Union, and simultaneously contain it, prevent it from expanding. Territorially, politically, economically. We had to we as a country had to be better than the Soviet Union as a political system, as an economic system, and as a society, to win the Cold War. And arguably,. Kennon's vision of how the Cold War would ultimately end was born out. The United States and capitalism did ultimately witness the implosion of Soviet communism without a shot fired. And this implosion of Soviet communism came from internal demands. For change and improvement of a system that was deemed by many within the system itself as wanting and not up to the contest with American style democracy and capitalism. 