 Let's move on to the Truman Doctrine. Now the Truman Doctrine was a landmark foreign policy statement that set a precedent for the rest of the Cold War. Harry Truman argued that the United States needed to support Greek nationalists that were fighting a civil war against Greek communists. This situation arose in part because the previous hegemon in the region, Great Britain, withdrew from the region and left the power vacuum. In replacing Great Britain, the United States became and sort of emerged as sort of a new global leader. The only country capable of intervening to prevent tragedy from striking, again, sort of this example of the essential country or the -- >> Indispensable. >> -- indispensable country. Right. It also set a precedent for American international intervention in domestic conflicts. Finally, it established the Domino Theory, which was an important justification for such interventions in the domestic politics of other countries. Greece was not important in and of itself to American security interests. It was a small country. It was incapable of invading or threatening the United States. Yet the Domino Theory made American interests incredibly expansive. Greece may not be able to threaten the US but if Greece was allowed to go communist, then communism could spread throughout the region, particularly in Europe, and that would threaten US interest. Like a stack of dominoes this logic would be applied regularly throughout the Cold War to legitimate interventions in the Third World in particular to prevent the spread of communism. The target country might not be that important but the idea that communism spread meant that you had to stop the initial footprint of communism in any region that might be deemed important. >> Can I jump in on one thing here? On the Truman Doctrine and Greece, you can see how an important precedent is set up with respect to Vietnam. And so you have the United States replacing the British position in Southeast Europe. The same thing is going to happen post-1954 in Vietnam when the French get defeated and then that provides justification. The argument is you got to power vacuum; the communists are getting stronger, so inserts the United States into this. And so there's a clear line here between what happens to the British position in Southeastern Europe and what happens to the French position in Southeast Asia that the US feels. Right. >> So, the United States then was facing another big challenge in the wake of the devastation of World War II and that challenge was economic decline and devastation in Europe. The fear here that was addressed by the Marshall Plan was that European publics would actually vote communist governments into office through the ballot box. Large communist parties existed in France and Italy in particular, and they were poised to capture power without a single shot fired. Stalin and his communist party were counting on these advances within west European countries and would use their communist party to control the communist parties in France or Italy and the governments that they would run if they would actually accede to power through popular elections. And so the theory went that because there were ties between European communist parties and the communist party in the Soviet Union, a victory by domestic communist parties in a place like France or Italy would mean a victory for the Soviet Union. The fear here was that economic dislocation would cause European publics to be attracted to extreme ideologies like communism, and conversely economic growth was the best antidote to this problem of domestic attraction to communism. So this policy also, of course, played to a major advantage that the United States had over the Soviet Union, as can be seen by the images here on this slide, in particular the one on the right showing the mechanized economic aid that the US provided versus, the very non-mechanical aid that the Soviet Union was trying to pawn off on their east European allies. By tying the European economies to the global capitalist economy anchored on the US economy the United States could not only contain communism, it could also provide itself with foreign export markets for its goods and services which served to fuel domestic economic growth at home. The Soviet Union argued that the Marshall Plan was simply a manifestation of American imperialism. The strings attached to economic aid, according to the Soviets, came at a high cost of sovereignty and economic independence. In fact, the United States even theoretically would offer the Soviet Union Marshall Plan aid, although they were -- that would have been quite difficult to justify politically. Indeed, American policymakers counted on the Soviet Union to decline Marshall Plan aid for just this reason. But arguably, the Soviet Union correctly saw Marshall Plan aid as a strategy to not only rebuild west European economies but also attract east European countries into the fold of American-led global capitalism. The Soviet Union would not let this happen even if it meant using force to prevent East European countries from participating. And so as the quote from George Marshall shows this was meant to at least seem like an altruistic policy, one that was not directed against any particular country, but rather as a [inaudible] for all countries that were devastated by World War II. Now, do you have anything to add on Marshall Plan? >> Yeah, I just wanted to point out two things here. Notice the confluence between economic and security interests in the Marshall Plan. Rob talking about rebuilding Western Europe, and this would be a good outlet for American exports. This is the old open door policy, the societal interests in expanding access to -- expanding the access of American exporters to markets abroad is really critical to growth and political stability at home. So that's part of the open door. But then you also get this confluence with security interests. We need to halt and stem the spread of communism in Western Europe. So that's one thing. The second thing I want to point out here is the Marshall Plan has long historically served as this critical example of how foreign aid could work. So in the immediate aftermath of 9/11 what you get is a series of conversations, op-ed pieces, and discussions in public policy debates. We need a new Marshall Plan for the Middle East to offset the spread of terrorism there. And so this is how, rather than military force this is what we should be doing instead, using foreign aid. >> Right. And the same debate happened after the collapse of communism in the Soviet Union, that there was this drive for a Marshall Plan to aid economically Russia and the former states of the Soviet Union. Now, let me move on then to the late 1940's. So just to recap quickly, the Truman Doctrine extends military interests and political interests of the United States into a global arena. The United States is [inaudible] engaged in world politics around the world. The Marshall Plan tries to connect economic interests with security interests, bringing a particularly the European economies into a global US-led capitalist economy. Now, this was all going quite well, arguably, in the mid 1940's. The Marshall Plan arguably worked quite well. European economies were rebuilt. Domestic attraction to communist parties subsided in France and Italy, and the prospects for electoral success of communist parties in Western Europe dwindled. What's more, European economic integration with each other and with the American economy was well on its way. The German economy was being rebuilt as an engine for European recovery. The American economy was thriving as exports of American products grew. And so the Marshall Plan worked. It almost worked too well. The Soviet Union built its own economic block centered on its centralized economy and provided east European countries with some economic assistance. The Soviet Union started to withdraw from international activity which posed the problem for American policymakers who were trying to maintain American foreign engagement in the world, and to avoid a repeat of mistakes made in previous eras such as the global depression and World War II. The Marshall Plan, more than any other program separated east and Western Europe into two separate political and economic units. However, as much success as was achieved in the mid-1940's from the Marshall Plan the tide was about to turn against the United States in the late 1940's through a series of crises. Now, first in 1948 the Soviet Union engineered a coup d'etat in Czechoslovakia. The Czechoslovak government wanted to participate in the Marshall Plan but the Soviet Union simply would not allow it. Following quickly after this coup in Czechoslovakia came the crisis, the first crisis of the Berlin Blockade. Now I'm not going to go into great detail about this because Pat's going to talk about it in a minute. Although I will say that the Berlin Airlift, engineered by the Truman Administration, seemed to me to be quite an ingenious answer to Stalin's blockade of that city. Now, soon after the Czech coup and the Berlin Blockade, the Soviets got another big boost. Stalin, through well-placed spies within the Manhattan Project at Los Alamos, New Mexico, managed to develop his own atomic bomb in 1949, based on secrets stolen from the United States through this spy network. And this development came years before the United States expected the Soviets to have this technology. Now this, of course, was an incredibly important development because it took away the United States monopoly over nuclear weapons. No longer could the United States threaten the Soviets with nuclear war without also experiencing the fear of nuclear holocaust being unleashed on its own largest cities, or the cities of Western Europe. Quite soon after the achievement of the atomic bomb by the Soviet Union the two superpowers would be locked into standoff of mutually assured destruction in which the initiation of war could very well mean nuclear annihilation for both sides. So we'll return to this a bit later in the semester when we cover nuclear deterrents. So, now the tides and the pendulum starts to swing the other way. The Soviet Union consolidates power in Eastern Europe, squeezes Berlin through a Berlin Blockade, achieves the atomic bomb. But that's not all. In Asia Mao Tse-tung won his longstanding civil war and gained control over China for the Chinese communist party, transforming China into the world's most populace communist state. This was a huge setback for the United States, increasing the power for the Soviet Union and its communist international, and forcing the nationalist forces, led by Chiang Kai-shek, to flee China for the island of Taiwan. The so-called loss of China to the communists had enormous consequences, not only internationally but also domestically within the United States. There were accusations that this setback was orchestrated by communist operatives working in the State Department. These accusations led to the rise of McCarthyism and the Red Scare in the 1950's, in the United States. And finally, in 1950, the Korean War breaks out and the United States finds itself in another war a mere five years after the end of World War II. With the Soviet Union absent from the Security Council of the United Nations, the United States pushes through a UN resolution to defend South Korea from North Korea. Here the Domino Theory and the Truman Doctrine come into play again. Korea was deemed not important per se but rather was seen as a potential threat to Japan which was deemed a national interest priority for the United States as a counterweight nation to both Russia and China. And so, by 1950 the United States found itself in a war in Asia facing a divided Europe and a nuclear armed Soviet Union. Not an ideal situation. In response to these developments in Europe the United States enacted two major policies as seen in this slide. The first here is NATO, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, which tied Western Europe and the United States together in a mutual security pact. The central provision of this alliance was that an attack on one member state was considered an attack on all member states. This meant the United States committed to protecting its European allies from Soviet invasion, something that looms rather large now in the wake of the current Ukrainian crisis given that Ukraine is not a member of NATO but desperately wants to be. The alliance was famously depicted as striving to keep the Russians out, the Americans in, and the Germans down. Something that Pat's going to talk about in a second, I think. The second major policy adopted was NSC-68, which committed the United States to, among other things, a huge increase in the defense budget and rather large tax increases to pay for that defense budget. So, anything you want to add about the crises in 1948 and '49? >> So, just a couple things. The Cold War by the end of the Korean War, in the early 1950's, we're coming to a transition point. And this is a function of domestic politics, so think back again about the role in domestic politics shaping grand strategy. So Truman leaves office in early 1953, Eisenhower comes in and he comes in faced with the vision that this is going to be a long, conflict with the Soviet Union. And the United States has engineered a massive military build-up in the last three to four years in response to these crises in the late '40s and the early 1950's. But Eisenhower comes to the conclusion that the United States cannot sustain the domestic costs of a long-term arms race with the Soviet Union. And so this begins to create a shift in American strategy. Eisenhower becomes much more willing to increase the reliance of American military power on nuclear weapons, and then this is going to open up a series of controversies and challenges with America's relationship with its allies, because then they're going to wonder will the United States use nuclear weapons to protect Paris if the Soviet Union can in turn take out New York City with a nuclear weapon? So this attempt -- but then Eisenhower tries to engineer over the 1950's, which is how do we make the long run conflict with the Cold War palatable to the domestic public, is going to have huge implications for thinking about how the Cold War plays out and America's relationship with its allies. >> Because ironically nuclear weapons were cheaper -- >> Yes. >> -- not more expensive as a military technology. >> Yeah. Yeah. Definitely for the United States. 