 What I'm going to do now is give you a slightly different take on the Cold War that compliments what Rob has been discussing. This casts the Cold War in Europe as really the final stage of a century's long political dilemma in Europe that many have labeled as the German problem. The claim here is that the larger Cold War was activated and sustained in its first 20 years as a conflict over what to do with Germany so that it could never destabilize the world again. So before defining this German problem I want to give you some sense of what it means in geographic terms. So we're going to try and run a video here, which some of you have probably seen, it shows how the political boundaries in Europe changed over the last thousand years. Since this is a class on US Foreign Policy we're going to start in 1776, but I want you to pay special attention, though, to central Europe and how it changes over this. All right, here we go. Let's see if we can figure this out. Everybody's laughing in the studio. All right. Let me expand this out, and let's go ahead and play. [Background Music] So you guys should have a video here on the screen. I'm going to narrate this slightly. We can take a break a little bit here, but notice what's going on in central Europe, and you have this series of small countries in the center of Europe. And that's contemporary Germany. We're at 1805 now and it's going to stay this way, we're going to see some rapid changes, but notice what begins to happen if you look in the upper left-hand corner of your screen when you get to 1871. So let me tell -- before we get to 1871, let me tell you a little bit about what is the German problem. At its core the German problem reflects the following political dilemma. A politically united Germany challenges European political stability and peace because it is both threatening to its neighbors, and Germany is simultaneously threatened by its neighbors. And we're going to see big changes that really activate this German problem right about now, when Germany reunifies after a series of wars from 1864 to 1871. [ Music ] So why does this German dilemma exist? On the one hand Germany is threatening because it is the strongest economic and military power in Europe. After a series of successful wars from 1864 to 1871 that unified Germany, its neighbors worry whether Germany will be satisfied with its new territorial borders. All right. Here we go, World War I. Boom! Watch what happens there. And there we have the Versailles Settlement where Germany gets shrunk. And now I want you to -- 1927, I want you to pay attention to what happens from '39 to '42. And this is really -- and keep '42 in mind when you think about Joe Stalin in 1953. Right here. Okay. That's the big deal. All right. So there, that's our video. Let me come back and get our lecture notes up here. So imagine if you think about the Cold War in the early 1950's, think about those borders and think about 1942. So, why do we have this German problem? I got to go back and find out where I am. All right, here we go. So Germany, once it's unified in 1864 to 1871, it is the strongest economic and military power in central Europe. But there's a dilemma here as well. So it threatens its neighbors and we can see what Hitler does in 19 -- after 1933 he's trying to carve out more territorial space for Germans in Eastern Europe. So on the other hand here's the dilemma. Germany is threatened because it is surrounded by large powers that can potentially join together and attack Germany simultaneously. German military leaders worry constantly about the challenges of fighting a two or three-front war in which some combination of France, Russia, and states in southeastern Europe attack it. Germany would then be forced to spread its military forces out thinly across all of its frontiers, making its defenses weak in all places. So this vulnerability to a coordinated attack creates a temptation for Germany consistently to expand and carve out buffer states like, the Austra-Hungarian empire or what we see Hitler from '38 to 1942 that could blunt the military advances of its enemies. This German vulnerability and the temptation to attack then simultaneously threatens its neighbors creating really a self-reinforcing spiral of vulnerabilities. Hopefully now you can see why it's a dilemma. So this problem really doesn't exist until 1871 because Greater Germany reflects a huge collection of smaller states, principalities, and then two larger powers, namely Austria and Hungary. So consequently one historical solution to the German problem that the French wanted in 1919, and then that the Americans and the Soviets did in 1945, is just disaggregation of Germany and Central Europe. So now let's bring this back into the Cold War. The Cold War solution which begins to emerge in 1945 doesn't stabilize until 1963 because the United States and the Soviet Union possessed fundamentally different strategies for solving this German problem. Their respective implementation of these contradictory strategies really shapes the origin of the Cold War and then how it evolves. These strategies first rested on military realities at the end of World War II. The victors, Great Britain, France, the United States, and the Soviet Union, each had occupation zones of Germany in which they were responsible for administering the territory, de-Nazifying it, and making sure that any form of German army didn't reconstitute itself. There was, though, an important cork in these occupation zones that really stands at the heart of the first 20 years of the Cold War, and that's Berlin. So even though Berlin fell within Eastern Germany which was the Soviet zone, the allies further sub-divided the city of Berlin into four zones. This quirk, an isolated Berlin within Eastern Germany would provide the flashpoint for a series of intense crises during the Cold War. They were all about how do we solve the long-term German problem. So eventually the American solution to the German problem included the partition of Germany into east and west and acceptance of Soviet domination of the east, the democratization of West Germany, and its economic and military integration with the West. And that military integration is a huge component and this is going to drive the Cold War from '58 to '63. The Soviets eventually accepted the partition of Germany, occupied it, occupied East Germany, helped set up a loyal communist regime there, and then integrated it into the Soviet bloc. See my slide? The Soviet solution, Moser, smiley face. So, at the same time why is this compromise so unstable for the first 20 years of the Cold War? First the American protected zone in West Berlin was a hostage. This is important. A hostage. And when we get to nuclear deterrents we're going to talk about this more. Essentially stability in the nuclear era stems on allowing -- the Americans and the Soviets effectively gave each other hostages. Made their cities vulnerable. This then creates over the long run a huge moral dilemma because security and stability rested on the threat that each other would kill millions of people. This becomes a big problem for Reagan in the 1980's. So let's come back to West Berlin. This city is surrounded by Soviet forces and is indefensible. American troops in West Berlin -- and the same thing works for American troops in the demilitarized zone in the Korean Peninsula today. Their purpose was straightforward and incredibly scary at the same time. It was to die. It was to create an irrevocable commitment. In other words, if American troops die on the ground in places that are military indefensible it becomes impossible for them for the United States step back from the crisis and to withdraw from Western Europe. And as Rob just said it's a trip wire. So, West Berlin, indefensible. Everybody knew it. The Soviets repeatedly threatened to take the city in a series of crises, the first in 1948, and then another repeat of this through 1958 to 1962. But Berlin has -- and this gets back to the logic I was just talking about. Berlin has a much deeper significance to the entire Western alliance. This is the signal of American commitment to protecting Western Europe from a Soviet invasion. The Americans worry that if they concede on West Berlin to the Soviet Union then the Soviets might doubt the American commitment to West Germany or France and then consider embarking on an invasion of those countries. And then there's an even more pernicious worry at play here. The Americans worry that if they let West Berlin go then the Western Europeans, and not just the Soviets, might think that the United States won't protect Western Europe. So then uncertain of the American commitment there Western European countries might opt for neutrality or cut a side deal with the Soviet Union that removed Cold War. So the US felt like if we concede on West Berlin we could lose Western Europe, either via an invasion of the Soviets because they doubt our commitment or Western Europe opts for a third way which is neutrality, to divorce themselves from the larger struggle. So quite simply the US decided that it could never let West Berlin go. Why does all of this threaten the Soviets? After all, they still occupied Eastern Europe. After the Western allies moved quickly to unify control over the three occupation zones and integrate West Germany into the alliance the Soviets became concerned that American support for Germany and its commitment to rebuilding the Germany economy might facilitate its military recovery even faster. Remember back to what that map of Europe looked like in 1942. That was at the forefront of Soviet grand strategy. There's also another element to this story. As the Cold War heats up, and I already mentioned this, and the United States launches the massive armament program associated with NSC-68 and then fights an extended conflict in Korea, the Eisenhower Administration becomes worried about whether the American public will be willing to sustain the long run economic costs of the Cold War. Eisenhower felt that the only way that the US could keep up in the arms race would be to institute economic controls like those in the Soviet Union to depress consumption and ensure that a disproportionate amount of American resources were devoted to defense. He knew, though, that these reforms, this greater government intervention in the domestic economy, meant making the United States more communist. And he knew that that was unsustainable domestically. This then leads him to argue that American allies had to shoulder a greater proportion of the responsibility for defending Western Europe. And think here about the conversations that we've had in the Barry Posen argument and in the Bob Gates -- Bob Gates the Secretary of Defense, when he leaves as Secretary of Defense he basically chides and criticizes the Europeans for not doing enough and relying too much on the United States. Eisenhower is doing the same thing in the 1950's. He's telling Western Europe we need you to shoulder more of this responsibility, including Germany. So Eisenhower becomes committed to German rearmament. Even more threatening to the Soviets, and this is big, Eisenhower was willing to give West Germany nuclear weapons. This was an absolute non-starter for the Soviets and really the key issue that divided the two sides and then escalated the Cold War from 1958 to 1963. So the flashpoint -- let's bring this back to Berlin. The flashpoint for this conflict over the German question throughout the Cold War is Berlin. As you can see on the map that's on the slide now, Berlin is nestled in East Central East Germany, and this is this Western outpost behind the Soviet Iron Curtain that we've been talking about. So we've got a series of military crises over Berlin in the first portion of the Cold War. The first, as Rob mentioned, occurs in 1948. The United States had been pushing for the economic unification of the different occupation zones of Germany to facilitate its recovery. American administrators knew that they could not continue to make large foreign aid transfers indefinitely. Remember, we've got to save costs. The Soviets, though, resist economic unification because they worry that it would draw East Germany closer to the Western orbit. So when the US takes steps to create a new German currency that would've effectively began the unification of the two Germany's economically the Soviets blockade Berlin in 1948 making it impossible to supply the city via the land corridor with Western aiding goods. So Truman gets advice from some of his advisors to launch strikes against the Soviets. He rejects this and opts instead to resupply the city via cargo planes. Now this crisis -- eventually the Soviets back down, they allow the planes to fly in, but this crisis creates considerable alarm in Europe and then helps to activate new pressures for a formal American security commitment through an alliance like NATO. So you get a new impetus for NATO through this first Berlin crisis. So, as I noted earlier Eisenhower opts to push for German rearmament forward in the 1950's, as a way of cutting American costs on the Cold War. I already mentioned, too, he seriously considers giving Germany nuclear weapons, and this, as I said, creates absolute panic in Moscow. The next crisis over Berlin that breaks out in 1958 really occurs with this backdrop in mind. The immediate issue that gives rise to this though is massive immigration from East Germany to West Germany through the corridor in the city. So frustrated with this massive immigration and the growing economic disparity between the two portions of the city, the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev demands negotiations to settle the German problem. If the United States refuses to settle he threatened to have the Soviet Union sign a separate peace treaty with East Germany who would then be free to terminate the American occupation rights of West Berlin, threatening then the entire Western alliance because it would force the United States potentially to fight for West Berlin. Eisenhower resists, again, internal pressure for military escalation of the crises and the two sides agree to a series of high-level talks. Khrushchev comes to the US in 1959 and then there's a summit in Paris in 1960. This opens up negotiations and creates a slight calm in the conflict. However, the Paris talks were derailed by -- can you guess this was set up by the pre-show music today -- by the U2 incident. 1960 a US spy plan is shot down over the Soviet Union right before the Paris Summit and it effectively kills it. And so the Berlin crisis is still unresolved. It heats up again in 1961 when we get a new president, President Kennedy, into office. It's prompted in part by a meeting between Kennedy and Khrushchev in June of 1961, and our knowledge of the meeting, it's clear that Khrushchev, seeing a young president, a new president, tries to bully him and he escalates the rhetoric over Berlin, demanding a new resolution to the problem. The flow of immigrants out of East Germany through Berlin by this point had become unsustainable. The number that I saw last night when I was checking these statistics was that about 2.7 million Germans, had moved from East Germany to West Germany since 1945, and this is creating a real problem for the East German government because these are the best and the brightest, the most educated, the most well-off, and it's undermining and opening up this economic gap between East Germany and West Germany. Well the East German government creates a solution to this problem, which is they build the Berlin wall to prevent movement back and forth between the two zones of the city, in August of 1961. There's a brief military crisis in October when tanks from the United States and the Soviet Union standoff. Ultimately it was resolved through back channel negotiations. But it's important to realize there's still no resolution to the German problem. The deeper issues associated with Berlin and West German armament by this point at the end of 1961 remain unresolved by the building of the Berlin Wall. The Soviets still want the US out of Berlin and the US still refuses to give in. As I mentioned, seeing it as critical signal that preserved the Western alliance. By 1860 by --sorry, by October of 1962, and this timing is important because in the first part of the month of October both sides are worried about Berlin but you can probably guess what happens at the end of the month. This is when the Cuban missile crisis breaks out and it's connected to what's going on in Germany. Both sides at this point, in the first part of the month, felt that a new crisis was imminent as attempts for some negotiated settlement over the past year had really stalemated. The historian Marc Trachtenberg argues that the Cuban missile crisis that breaks out in the fall of '62 was intimately connected to the struggle over Berlin and West Germany. Kennedy felt that the Soviets wanted nuclear weapons in Cuba that could reach most of the United States, essentially all of the continental United States except Washington and a part of Oregon I believe. Soviets want those nuclear weapons to strengthen their bargaining leverage through intimidation in Berlin, so they could threaten to strike on the United States and hopefully extract concessions in Berlin. Given that he expected some kind of showdown over Berlin shortly, this is Kennedy's mindset going into the Cuban missile crisis, he believed that he had to stand firm on Cuba to avoid setting a precedent of weakness. He also, though, and this is the problem and the conundrum he faces, he also worries that American military action in Cuba, if we go ahead and land troops in Cuba to try and get the nukes, would provoke Soviet military action in West Berlin. The resolution of the Cuban missile crisis, which we're going to talk more about in an upcoming lecture, really helps to pave the way for a settlement of the German problem. Both countries step back from the brink and they begin to think creatively about how can we solve the German problem. Remember the Soviet's main concern is West German acquisition of nuclear weapons. The US wants to preserve control over West Berlin, so how do they construct a deal? They construct a deal with the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty of 1963. The Test Ban Treaty prohibits future nuclear tests. As a consequence it was intentionally a counter proliferation treaty that was targeted -- it didn't say in the treaty document, but it's targeted at two states in particular, West Germany and China. Kennedy was effectively committing the United States to preventing West Germany from acquiring nuclear weapons. And the Soviets then could live with this compromise and then live with the United States in West Berlin. Okay, so why don't we go to the next slide and this is as a recap, this section has argued that the Cold War in Europe stemmed from a struggle over competing strategies to solve the German problem. Germany had regularly destabilized the peace of Europe over the prior century. Both the Soviets and the United States sought to ensure that Germany could not do so again. The American strategy, though, rekindled traditional Soviet fears about a future German invasion because the United States embraced the economic and military recovery of West Germany within the Western alliance system. Eisenhower had even gone so far as to allow or think about allowing West Germany to acquire nuclear weapons, an outcome that was absolutely unacceptable to the Soviet Union. So Trachtenberg argues that the Test Ban Treaty of 1963 becomes the magic solution to this crisis. It was effectively a counter proliferation treaty that would apply to West Berlin, effectively facilitating the resolution of the Cold War. The US had West Germany and West Berlin, the Soviets had their buffer states in Eastern Europe, and West Germany would not acquire nuclear weapons. This Cold War solution to the German problem rested on partition, occupation, the capacity of the two superpowers to shape domestic political outcomes in the two Germany's, and the preservation of their non-nuclear status. And this resolution of the Cold War inaugurates a shift in the Cold War. It moves out of Europe. 