 Let's move on then to another aspect of The Cold War, Third World Intervention. So, first let's sort of define what we mean by Third World Interventions. When we talk about Third World Interventions what we mean are several different types of military and pseudo-military interventions. First, and most well-known are the Proxy Wars. The United States fought long wars in Korea and Vietnam. In an attempt to prevent communism from spreading to those countries. The Soviet Union also fought its own war in Afghanistan to install a communist regime there. All of these wars, these Proxy Wars, posed immense problems for both Cold War superpowers. Now you have another documentary. From the CNN Cold War series on the Vietnam War that addresses these problems, that we will be talking about in this section, with, in regards to containment in the Third World. So that's the first type. Secondly, the second type of action or covert actions. These actions included secret operations by the CIA, such as the, coup attempt in Iran that unseated the democratically elected Prime Minister Mohammed Mossadegh in the early 1950's, as well as various attempts to keep left-leaning governments from taking or remaining in power in places like Chile, and other Latin American countries. And so, besides the Proxy Wars in which regular US forces intervened there are also these Covert Actions in which the CIA primarily played a part in trying to control governments, unseat the ones we didn't like and keep in power the ones that we did. Finally. The U.S. also supported friendly regimes around the world that furthered its economic and security interests. The United States provided enormous amounts of foreign and military aid to authoritarian regimes, in the large part. In Egypt, in Saudi Arabia for example. And the United States supported right-wing anti-communist military dictatorships in Latin America. In all of these actions, the United States faced much greater local opposition to its military and political influence than it did in Europe. It also experienced arguably much poor results, while the Marshall Plan led to a revival of European economies and the emergence of relatively stable democracies. The Cold War in the developing countries around the world resulted in military quagmires like Vietnam and unstable, unreliable, and undemocratic allies in Asia, Africa, and Latin America, and, also, domestic turmoil at home in reaction to these failures. So, why is that the case now? >> So why was containment easier in Europe than in the Third World? We're gonna offer you two sets of reasons. First, there were greater connections between the United States and Europe that made the American committment to the region easier to justify to the American public, and easier for the American public to accept. And it was easier for the public in target nations to accept as well. And this. And of complementarity of interests across these sets of countries was due to three primary and interrelated forces. Europeans were more acceptant of American involvement in third world countries tend, tended to be. There was simply less resistance to things like American military bases, in part because the United States played a huge, large, and largely positive roll in European affairs in both World War I and World War II from the vantage point of America's major allies in Western Europe. The experiences of the two world wars also made the American commitment to the region more easi, easily justifiable to the American public. And so this connection between European peace and prosperity, and American peace and pros, prosperity seem to be more direct. Second, the immediacy of the Soviet threat to European security made American intervention there seem more vital. The Soviets occupied Eastern Europe. They engage in crackdowns in Hungary in 1956. Czechoslovakia during the Prague Spring of the 1960s. And then, Poland in the early 1980s. All of these actions made the threat of Soviet invasion and military occupation quite real for European states and for the United States. So the containment strategy of providing counter force to prevent Soviet aggression and expansion seemed to match the reality of European politics quite accurately. The Soviet military was right there in Eastern Europe and could roll into Western Europe. Just as the Nazis did in World War II. Finally, Americans had greater political, cultural and historical ties to Europe than to the third world. Americans were more familiar with these countries. There was a special relationship with Great Britain. Waves of immigration in the 19th century meant significant family ties to the old country. The US had already fought two wars to protect against aggressive countries taking over the continent. Conversely, just as there were reasons that made containment in Europe easier to justify to the American public and accept in European countries, there were specific difficulties that made containment through American military intervention more difficult in the third world. First, in general, there was much more local resistance to American military and political intervention in third world countries. This was due in large part to two reasons. One historical, and the other ideological. The historical reason had to do with the history of Western imperialism in Asia and Africa, that only resulted in independence after World War II for most of the developing world. Imperialism and its harsh legacies of underdevelopment and weak political institutions created great resentment within developing countries towards those, towards those European countries that had previously ruled them. These countries were some of the United States closest allies. Great Britain, France, Belgium and the Netherlands. Once the Cold War began, the United States was guilty by association as a western country that had its own imperial history in countries like the Philippines. American intervention in these countries to prevent the spread of communism was viewed by many in the region as simply the latest manifestation of Western imperialism and exploitation. You can think about the war in Vietnam in these terms. The US explicitly replaces the French role there. Thus, unlike Europe, American intervention was not viewed as necessarily the better alternative to Soviet influence and hegemony. Corresponding with this historical reason was an ideological problem facing American intervention in the third world. Communism had strong ideological support within these countries precisely because of the imperial legacy noted before. Elites and mass populations within newly independent countries in Asia and Africa were inclined to blame their domestic, political, and economic problems on Western imperialism. And with good reason due to the economic and political exploitation that western powers had imposed on less developed countries, in the prior century. Communist ideology helps to expand and justify arguments about Western exploitation. Indeed, Vladimir Lenin, founder of the Soviet Union, developed one of the most famous ideological treatises, his theory of imperialism, which argued that Western capitalist countries helped to pacify their own working classes with higher wages, and thus avoid communist revolution, by exporting their exploitation to low wage workers in developing countries through imperialism. These ideas inspired third world communist insurgents like Ho Chi Minh in Vietnam. >> Now, let's talk about the domestic threat of communist insurgency in the third world. This is the second reason that containment was more difficult in the third world than it was in Europe. Is this nature of the domestic threat of communist insurgency that was quite different and arguably more troublesome in the third world. Unlike Europe, where the chief threat of communism's spread was through elections domestically, or invasion from the Soviet Union. Communist insurgency within the third world was rooted in civil wars and nationalist wars of independence in these developing countries. This resulted in several diffi, very specific difficulties for containment in the third world. The first of these was a severe lack of economic modernization and democratic political regimes in these countries that made non-military intervention more difficult. The martial plain provided economic aid that helped rebuild, let me stress, rebuild capitalist economies in Europe. However, in developing countries in Asia and Africa, they did not have functioning and successful capitalist economies or a history of democratic government. Instead, they were building these institutions, arguably from scratch, often in an environment of civil war, which made that experiment much harder. This made economic assistance from the United States a much less effective instrument of containment. Secondly, this left military intervention as the most common form of intervention. Arguably, the military might of the United States vastly outmatched any military in developing countries. However, foreign interventions in other country's civil wars are difficult military campaigns, even for super powers that are battling much smaller countries. Two factors play into this. First, there's po, an issue of political will, and second, unconventional warfare. Both of those factors provided communist insurgents in third world countries like Vietnam, great advantages. And this is seen in your film on the Vietnam War that is assigned for today. First, in terms of political will, the insurgents held a home field advantage. They had much more invested in fighting for their country's independence and survival than the United States did in fighting to stop the spread of communism. These forces and the populations that supported them were willing to give up much more. And to tolerate much more hardship and casualties than the American public was willing to accept. So remember this in the context of a previous reading by John Mueller about the declining support for wars in Korea, Vietnam and Iraq, once American casualties began to mount. Now second, and related to this, insurgents could engage in unconventional warfare. Guerrilla attacks and urban warfare, for example, that the US military was not very well equipped to fight. Especially in the early part of World War, I mean, of the Cold War after World War II. When one combines unconventional warfare and the problem of political will on the part of the American public, you see a winning strategy for the other side in the proxy wars like Vietnam. They did not have to defeat American forces on the battlefield, and this point is made in your film again. They only had to inflict enough damage in terms of casualties so that the American public would pressure American politicians to end the military campaign. Like I said, the Vietnam War film captures this problem very well in interviews with policymakers who struggled with an exit strategy in defining the mission in proxy wars like the United States and it provided some great footage of domestic protests that greatly damaged and eventually ended a prematurely arguably 'cause he didn't run for reelection the presidency of Lyndon Johnson. 