 ﻿1 The foreign policy of the United States has long supported democratic reform around the world. It's willingness to do so has grown in the aftermath of the Cold War. Members of the Clinton Administration argued that the United States should reorient its grand strategy from containment to enlargement. Because the Soviet Union had imploded, American foreign policy, obviously, no longer needed to concentrate on curbing the Communist threat. Instead, the United States should work to enlarge the number of democracies around the world by encouraging political reform in authoritarian regimes. The Bush Administration elevated this policy goal in its grand strategy, deploying military force in both Afghanistan and Iraq, in the hope of spurring democratic reform in the Middle East and Central Asia. This module reviews the history of such policies and the arguments offered in support of this foundational national interest. It proceeds in six segments, all of which are geared toward helping you evaluate the role of democracy promotion in American foreign policy. The first segment is definitional. It asks, what is a democracy? Or what institutions are necessary for a government to be classified as democratic? The second segment reinforces this conceptual overview by debating some of the positive social consequences attributed to democracy, along with some of the challenges associated with making democracy successful. The third segment moves the conversation into the realm of international relations. It asks and answers two questions. How does the presence of democratic institutions shape a government's foreign policy? And what are the consequences of democracy for interstate relations? These questions set up a conversation about something called the democratic peace in the fourth segment. This theory holds that the likelihood of military conflict between any two states falls when they are both democracies. We will identify some of its explanations for this relationship, and then transition into a brief outline of American efforts to promote democracy in the 20th Century. The fifth segment is a discussion of the reading by Encarnacion that is assigned for this module, which provides a critique of democracy promotion as a centerpiece of US foreign policy, and the sixth segment uses a re-evaluation of the underlying claims associated with the democratic peace, to challenge the broader foreign policy of democracy promotion. 