 Now we're gonna move on to democracy promotion and before discussing how democracy affects international politics, the first thing we really need to do is define democracy. And also, discuss the pros and cons of the democratic system of government. Democracy promotion is based on a fundamental assumption of the superiority of democracy as a political system. We here in the United States, often take this presumption for granted, this idea that democracy is a better form of government than other possible non-democratic alternatives, like monarchies or military dictatorships, one party states. But why do we assume this? This is something what I'm going to, and we're gonna talk a bit about right here at the beginning of class to kind of push and, and question this presumption. But before we can talk about the pros and cons of democracy, we first need to define democracy and so let's start with the definition. When it comes and you've got two statements on democracy here, one by Joseph Schumpeter, and this definition of democracy has served as a basis for most definitions of this crucial concept, democracy, by political scientists for more than a half century. You also have a statement by another famous political scientist, Samuel Huntington that serves as an important reminder about this definition. The one rooted in Schumpeter's statement, that democracy and the essence of democracy is an out -- is a process. It's a process. Democracy is a process not an outcome. Okay? So keep that in mind. Process not outcome. So Schumpeter argues that democracy is that institutional arrangement for arriving political decisions in which individuals acquire the power to decide by means of a competitive struggle for the people's vote. And so democracy, arguably is an institution, is a set of rules. It's how you structure political decision-making. Now Huntington makes another clear statement about what democracy is by stating elections, open, free and fair. So free and fair elections are the essence of democracy. Governments produced by elections, free and fair elections he means here, may be inefficient, corrupt, shortsighted, irresponsible, dominated by a special interest and incapable of adopting policies demanded by the public good. Okay, Sam, don't hold back. These qualities make such governments undesirable perhaps, but they do not make them undemocratic. In essence, these two quotes highlight one crucial element as the defining aspect of democracy. Competitive free and fair elections. As a bottom line, democracy can simply be defined according to the presence of absence of competitive elections. If a country has competitive elections, then it is dem, a democracy. If it doesn't have competitive elections, then it is not a democracy. Note especially, Huntington's statement about democracy is a process. This is important, because if weak are to compare the pros and cons of democracy to other political systems, we cannot include in the definition of democracy positive outcomes, such as justice for all or policies that follow the general will. These may be the philosophical goals of democracy, but they are not necessarily the base elements, the defining elements of the system. In short, if we have to allow for the idea that -- we need to allow for the idea that democracies, like any other political system can make bad decisions. So democracies have free and fair elections, but that's not the end of the story when it comes to defining democracy. And here, Robert Dahl is the central scholar that everyone turns to in defining what it takes to hold free and fair elections. So while this singular element, free and fair elections, may seem like a relatively low threshold for democracy, it actually requires several other conditions that make democracy a much more difficult political system to attain. So, Robert Dahl, the theorist of democracy, agreed that competitive elections were the basis of democracy. But he provided a number of other preconditions that need to be met in order to ensure that multi-party elections are truly free and fair. So, I've broken down, he has a whole list, let me be straight with you. It's not just three, but I've sort of broken down this longer list of his conditions into three broad categories. One is what Dahl calls political contestation. Second is inclusion, the third is democratic sovereignty. You might have asked yourself why civil rights and liberties were not included in the middle definition of democracy, we just stressed competitive elections? I mean, what is democracy without the freedom of speech or association? Now Robert Dahl, and most other, and I'd say almost all other political scientists defining democracy would agree with you. Dahl's first precondition for truly competitive elections is what he calls public contestation. Public contenstation required multiple parties competing in elections but also the right of citizens to freely express themselves, form associations, and receive information from the media, right? Freedom of the press. So all those freedoms that we commonly associate with American democracy, they're in there. But they're in there as a condition that makes free and fair elections possible. Without these freedoms, without these civil rights and civil liberties, even if there are multi-party elections, these elections would not be truly free and fair. And thus the system would not be democratic. Now the next pre-condition is that, one that has many western democracies, including the United States, has struggled mightily with. And that is the condition of inclusion. Not only must there be civil rights and liberties that allow this, the citizens within the system free, freedom to express themselves and, and, and mobilize, but the system must allow universal and equal participation by all segments of society. If a group, such as women or an ethnic minority, which has been the two social categories that have been most subject to problems of inclusion. If these groups are systematically excluded from the political process, then that polity does not meet the minimal procedural threshold of democracy according to Dahl. So note how difficult this precondition has been to meet for western democracies. Now finally then, there is the issue of democratic sovereignty. For Dahl, there not only needs to be democratic elections. But those democratic elections must result in the establishment of truly powerful decision making bodies such as legislatures and chief executives. If a country holds truly competitive elections, but the most important decisions are made by unelected bodies like the military or religious authorities. Then, according to Dahl's minimal conditions, the country is still not democratic. Elections to bodies without any real political party, or power, don't count. So, evermore competitive elections in Iran for example, will not necessarily make that country democratic. It might make it more democratic but it won't sort of, get over that threshold, if it's the non-elected powers, such as religious authorities, that hold the real power. 