 What's so great about democracy? Now, Robert Dahl tried to answer this question in a small little book called "On Democracy," he came up with ten reasons why democracy is better than other systems. Thame's reasons are a little redundant, so I broke them out into three broad categories, right? First, democracy is advantageous, is a good political system and better than its alternatives, according to Dahl, because it constrains the potential for State repression. So, democracy limits state power through forcing rulers to face reelection. And also, because it opens the system up to criticism through individual freedoms, like freedom of speech and freedom of the press. As a result, the worst human rights abuses, such as genocide and mass coercion, and repression -- things like the holocaust in Nazi Germany, Stalin's Soviet Union and the gulag, are tend to be avoided, to a certain extent, in democracies. Now, again, one can find historical examples of democracies doing things, I mean, if you think of the persecution of Native Americans in the United States that's not a positive record. But, in general, what Dahl would argue, and others, advocating for the superiority of democracy is that democracy has institutional mechanisms to avoid that sort of thing. The second advantage of democracy is greater individual autonomy and responsibility. And so, the personal freedoms inherent in democracy, not only s -- to not only speak your mind, but also to choose your spouse, your profession, it increases the individual responsibility and opportunity that's found in the system. You can more easily -- Individuals can more easily follow their ambitions. And their own, sort of moral compass in a democracy. This creates greater autonomy and more moral responsibility. In a dictatorship, individuals have less control over their lives and thus less responsibility, arguably, for some of their decisions. Remember, for example, the defense of the guards and others involved in Nazi concentration camps. What was that defense? That defense was, they were just following order. They were under threat of serious coercion to do things that was against their better moral judgment. And thirdly, so the first two is avoids extreme state repression. The second one is more moral, and individual autonomy. The third one is that democracy is simply more successful. Doll argues that democracies are more successful politically and economically. They tend to be wealthier than the dictatorships and they do a better job of taking care of their citizens by redistributing wealth. Right? As you'll -- and then as we will see later in this lecture when it comes to the so called democratic peace argument, there's also a case to be made that democracies tend to be more peaceful, or at least tend to avoid conflict with other democracies. So, ask yourself this. What's the counter argument, right? That about democracy. What's the problems with democracy? And the first thing I always throw out when, when thinking about the, the arguments against democracy is to ask this question. If democracy is better, right? In all of these things. Avoiding tyranny, providing more individual autonomy, etc. More successful. Then, why is there so little democracy in our daily lives? Right? Are our families, democracies? I know that my family is not. It is what I would call a competitive authoritarian system. We have meetings, we have discussion, we'll take a vote, and then the autocrat decides, and that autocrat is not me. So is a football team a democracy? Is a corporation a democracy? Is this class a democracy? Hell no, this class is not a democracy. Professor McDonald, and secondarily me set the readings. We define the assignments, we set all the exam dates, and you guys just have to do it and take it. You're welcome. So we don't take a vote. When should we have the next test? What should the paper be about? We just decide and impose it on you. Why not? Why don't we hold a vote on when the exam should take place, and what it should cover? Well I've got some reasons. The reasons typically have to do with efficiency, and with expertise. We're the experts we know best. So, let's extend these to the broader argument about democracy. The same critiques that can be applied to using a democratic system here in this class, have often been applied to democracies around the world and throughout history. So in Russia, for example, President Vladimir Putin, and his authoritarian style of rule have been embraced by many Russians as bringing order to chaos. The previous system, which was more democratic under Boris Yeltsin was also quite chaotic and thus less than efficient. There's also this argument that those who are best informed should make decisions and one kind of plays with fire when allowing the mass public to make decisions on things that they're not very well informed on. So you're all of voting age and should be eligible to vote now and I strongly urge you to do so. However, many scholars, observers, and others have argued that the typical citizen is simply too poorly informed to make decisions about who should rule through election. So, what do we really know? For example, what does the average citizen really know about the ins and outs of healthcare law? The healthcare law, or the, you know, recent ballot proposition on light rail for Austin. Right? Democracy places real decision making power in the hands of a large group of people who may have no business making these kinds of decisions. And so the argument against democracy is wouldn't it be better if these decisions were left up to experts or guardians of some sort, who would be fully informed about the issues and could make more well-informed judgements. And so, you've got these two arguments against democracy. The danger, as your slide says, of uninformed majorities, and the problem of inefficiency. Democracies debating forever and not really making tough decisions. So what is the counter response? How do we save democracy from this? So the next slide provides what I like to use in this final sort of summary judgement and that's from Winston Churchill. Right? And he said, famously, "No one pretends that democracy is perfect or all" "wise. Indeed it has been said that democracy is the worst form of Government," "except all those other forms that have been tried from time to time." So, from this quote by Winston Churchill, the critics of democracy are right. Democracy does, does have these flaws, inefficiency, poorly informed voters, it's messy and chaotic, but what Churchill argues and what most advocates of democracy argue is that the alternative centralization of power is even worse because it allows a small group of people to rule unchecked and use political power to further their own interests, over the interests of collective, of the collective, of the, of the common good. As messy as competitive elections are, those advocates of democracy argue that they provide a significant opportunity to check the powerful and to provide an opportunity for individuals to pursue their own self-interests. The checks on power provided by competitive elections are definitely not fool proof, right, but they have produced over time, arguably, better results for the freedom and general welfare of citizens than non-democratic systems. Authoritarian regimes have, arguably, as Dahl pointed out, killed and repressed many more people than democracies. Democracies have also provided many opportunities to their citizens to express themselves and pursue their interests. So democracy is seriously flawed, but everything else is worse. Not really a ringing endorsement, but that's what we have. 