 Now I want to build on Rob's discussion of what is democracy, to talk about some of the ways in which the institutions of democracy within states influence relations among states. Now these claims are nested in a broader theoretical proposition, that we can understand the quality of interstate relations by focusing first on their internal, political and economic characteristics. As a sidebar, this possibility is linked back, if you remember the big questions that we gave you on the first day of class. This possibility is linked back to the fourth big question that we presented, namely, how does the way that we structure our domestic politics inside the United States affect our foreign policy? Okay, this focus on democratic institutions leads us to the question that really organizes our content for today. How does democracy within states shape their external relation? When we ask this question, we are essentially asking a comparative question. That examines how the foreign policy decisions of democratic states differ from the foreign policy decisions of non-democratic, or autocratic, regimes. So now what I'm going to do is identify four mechanisms by which democracies and autocracies differ in terms of their foreign policy outputs. First, the presidents of regular competitive elections acts as a powerful device by which society can impose political costs on politicians for bad policies, like costly wars. So this potential punishment mechanisms pressures those same politicians to be more cautious in their foreign policy choices. Alternatively, autocratic leaders don't face the same threat of domestic punishment. Therefore, they can engage in more risky foreign policies with less fear of domestic punishment. For example, Saddam Hussein could fight a long war with Iran in the 1980s and then turn around and invite another war with the United States for his invasion of Kuwait in large part because he didn't have to fear getting thrown out of office by huge domestic, or by large domestic groups. There was effective repression devices that allowed him to control and minimize internal dissent, and continue to prosecute, which were incredibly costly foreign policies. Now some scholars argue that these electoral pressures makes democratic leaders very selective in their decision to go to war. Democratic leaders only go to war when they have a very strong likelihood of victory. Now this possibility has been used to explain this empirical finding, that democratic states are more likely, on average, to win the wars they fight, than autocratic states. >> Okay. So, Pat. Let's stop for a second because, of course, we're talking about democracies not fighting wars. But President George W Bush fought a very unpopular war against Iraq. So how could he have done this if majorities of the public opposed the Iraq War at least by like 2005? >> Yeah. So I think there's a couple of points to keep in mind here. First, when the war was initiated in 2003, a majority of the public supported it. Next remember that Americans had a chance to throw Bush out of office in 2004 in those presidential elections, with John Kerry. The war in Iraq was a critical part of the election, and yet President Bush won. This means that at that time, if we take elections as an indicator of where the public is, the majority of the American public supported the continuation of the status quo policy. Because President Bush was not campaigning in 2004 on a withdrawal from Iraq. Now public support doesn't really begin to crater in the United States until after the 2004 elections, and what's significant there? By then, the American public had a limited capacity to constrain the president because Bush wasn't running for re-election. Second, the other thing to keep in mind here, is that these Democratic pressures, even if they didn't prevent the United States from going to war in Iraq, or didn't make it possible for the American public to withdraw, or to get the government to withdraw from the war in Iraq, say after 2006, these democratic pressures still shaped how President Bush fought the war. The administration tried to reduce the domestic costs of war by cutting taxes, and by paying for the war with more loans, essentially, increasing the American debt. What did this do? It effectively delayed the real economic costs of the war until after he left office. So in sum, elections still shaped how the war was fought. So let's move on to the second way in which democracy shapes foreign policy decisions. Democracies are better than autocracies at solving the problem of contracting or making deals over time. This means that democratic states are more likely to abide by their commitments or promises than autocratic regimes. So when a democracy signs a trade pact with another, with another country or another group of countries they're more likely to abide by the terms of that trade pact than an autocratic regime. Why? Because there are institutional checks and balances within democracies. Like the separation of power between the legislative and executive branches. Or you can think about the filibuster rule in the Senate that often requires 60 votes to pass legislation. These institutional checks and balances, make it more difficult to change a foreign policy once a decision has been made. So, you can think about this constraint with the following example. So, the United States and South Korea signed a new trade agreement that came into existence in 2012. The executive branch negotiated, and then, Congress ratified it. Given that the United States is a democracy, we have to assume that some domestic groups must have benefited from this policy, this reduction and trade barriers with South Korea. Otherwise, why would the government have done it if everyone was opposed? So, some group within the United States benefits from this policy. What's important though is now that this policy is in place, any group that wants to overturn that policy, that wants to get the government to change its mind and say "withdraw from this trade pact with South Korea." They must be able to counteract the beneficiaries of the free-trade policy with South Korea in the domestic politics of democracy. Inside the United States. And the problem here is, these beneficiaries, the groups that supported the free trade pact initially, they had the institutional means to preserve that policy. For example, they could focus their efforts on the Senate, where we have the filibuster, which means it would take 60 votes to get the Senate to abide by or say a new agreement to abolish the free trade policy. What this means now is that supporters of that free trade pact, they only need to find 41 Senators to hold the line to preserve the status quo policy. They can filibuster, and prevent any change in the status quo trade policy with South Korea. So in this way these checks and balances help to preserve American foreign policy promises, once they get made, get made, made. It can be hard to get agreements in democracies, and think about this in the context of the Iranian negotiations that are going on right now and the possibility that the Senate might push back on those. But once you get agreement, democracies tend to abide by their agreements much longer than autocracies. Okay, so let's now identify a third way in which democracy within states shapes relations among them. Democracies tend to externalize the norms of conciliation and compromise that characterize the process by which domestic disagreements are resolved within democracies. So, obviously, we see a lot of screaming between Democrats and Republicans on the news. President Obama is called a Socialist. Members of Congress associated with the Tea Party are labeled radicals by Democrats. The rhetoric is harsh and dramatic, and it often leads to gridlock, but what happens with that gridlock? Gridlock often means the preservation of the status quo. And moreover, unlike in 1861, when we had a civil war break out, the Democrats and the Republican parties don't threaten to secede or mobilize an army to march on Washington when there's a big disagreement in Congress. This situation, about that -- that's really about non-violent conflict resolution in the United States differs significantly from other states around the world. Compare this reality to Iraq, Syria, or Yemen right now. All of which are struggling to maintain some form of power sharing arrangement among contending factions. The point of this is that democracies tend to resolve conflicts at home peacefully through compromise and conciliation. Now, a shared or common identity among democracies helps them to establish trust among each other, whereby they expect that the cooperative or conciliatory policies by one democracy toward each other will be reciprocated. In other words, there's an expectation that because democracies tend to resolve their differences, internally, peacefully, that they will treat other democracies in the same fashion because that's how they do things internally. So when the United Kingdom and Germany, say, have a dispute over current immigration policies within the European Union. The two sides don't even think about going to war. That idea is ridiculous, in part, because they share a common democratic identity that helps to sustain cooperation between them and create an expectation that they will be able to find some non-violent compromise between each other. So let's go to the fourth mechanism. Democracy also influences relations between states by increasing the transparency of the policy making process. This is facilitated by opposition with Congress that disagrees with the President and tries to mobilize resistance to the President's policies. It's also enabled by a competitive press that makes it very difficult to keep secrets, to keep things from the public. Together these institutions help to reduce some of the uncertainty associated with negotiating or transacting with democracies. This then makes it easier for other countries to make concessions to a democracy because they can predict what that democracy is going to do in the future. So, in the case of the Iranian negotiations, Iran and Israel had a good sense about where the American public is at. The majority of the American public supports it but there's significant resistance in Congress. All right, they can see what's coming. There's more uncertainty for the United States with respect to negotiating with Iraq because even though there are elections, there is an institutional body that has the final say in Iran over making these policies. Okay, so we've given you four mechanisms by which democracy shapes relations among states. Let's now talk about some of the broader political consequences for democracy in international politics. These net, or these four foreign policy attributes are associated with a lot of net positives. Let me just give you a few. First, democracies tend to trade more with each other. They have more open commerce. And this tends to increase the aggregate size of the economy. And facilitates economic growth. Why? Because democracies are more likely to cut their tariff barriers and join preferential trading agreements, with these lower tariff barriers, than autocratic regimes. So democracy facilitates greater levels of globalization, which helps to increase economic growth. Second, foreigners tend to invest more capital into economies that are governed by democratic regimes. Because they feel that these institutions associated with democracy help to protect property rights and prevent the confiscation of their assets or the nationalization of private property by the government. And then all the local businesses that depend on the jobs that are created by foreign investment into an economy have the institutional means through elections to punish a government if it threatens these jobs by confiscating foreign investment or imposing new rules that make it very difficult for foreigners to bring their capital into a democratic polity. Now the capacity to make more durable commitments on the part of democracies, leads democracies to join military alliances with each other and fight on the same side in wars. Remember, Rob talked about how the United States pushed for democratic consolidation in Eastern Europe as a condition for NATO expansion. Along these lines, democratic transition are viewed as a means of demonstrating commitment to some external alliance pact. And so the United States wants to join alliances with democracies because they think democracies are more likely to honor those alliance commitments when push comes to shove, potentially when a war might break up. As I noted earlier, these same institutional checks and balances make democratic leaders very cautious before joining a war. They only fight when they think they can win and these selection effects help to explain why democracies are more likely to win wars than autocratic regimes. Now finally, I want to talk about the consequences of democracy for the outbreak of peace and war among states. And this is this, this thing called the democratic peace that we're also going to spend some time talking about in the next class. This is perhaps the most talked about foreign policy consequence of democracy. This theory, which has played a large role in the public justification of the policy of democracy promotion around the world by the United States, holds, okay -- So the theory is the foundation for American policy of democracy promotion. What exactly is the theory? It holds that military conflict is less likely between two democracies than between any other grouping of states. So, if you've got two democracies together, that pair of states is going to be less likely to engage in military conflict than say, a paring of two autocracies or a pairing of a democratic regime and an autocratic regime. So democracies will be less likely to fight when they're interacting with other democracies. However, and this is important, they will still fight autocracies. Thus, this democratic peace is a zone that is restricted solely to democratic states. Now this condition means that the American decision for war against Iraq in 2003 does not contradict the logic of democratic peace theory because the theory does not expect peace between democracies and autocracies. Iraq was an autocracy in 2003. Instead, the theory predicts peace between the United States and Canada. Or say, between the United States and India, but not necessarily peace between the United States and Russia. 