 Alright, in this segment I want to do three things. First, I will provide a set of mechanisms by which democracy might promote peace between states. You can think about mechanisms as answering the question -- How exactly might democracy promote peace? Secondly, I want to translate this theoretical conversation into a policy one by briefly reviewing the history of American efforts to promote democracy around the world since the end of World War I. Remember, the claim that democracy facilitates peace among states provides one way to defend the policy or normative claim that the United States should be in the business of promoting democracy in the world. And third, I want to discuss the Encarnación reading that was assigned for this module. Okay, so how exactly might democracy promote peace? First, elections raise the political costs of going to war. Democratically elected officials must be very cautious before bringing society into war because society pays the real costs of war in terms of loss of life and its economic costs. These electoral pressures can raise the political costs a leader might pay for the decision to go to war. In short, politicians may lose the next election if they go to war and the society decides that that wasn't a very good idea. This dynamic then can encourage politicians in a democracy to find peaceful settlements and suppress the likelihood of democracies going to war against other democracies. Second, the institutional checks and balances associated with democracy say, found in the separation of authority between the executive and legislative branches helps to solve the commitment problem among democracies. The settlements constructed within democracies, between different democracies, tend to be more robust and more stable because they are hard to change domestically. Groups that benefit from an international status quo that includes peace can then block any change within democracies by directly lobbying to Congress for example in the United States. Third, democracy also possess a shared democratic identity with each other that fosters expectations of non-violent compromise and the belief that other democratic societies will view them in reciprocal terms. The publics in democratic societies are much less likely to support the use of military force against other democracies. Now this reminds me of a movie I saw long ago called Canadian Bacon in which it was a comedy with John Candy in which they tried to mobilize, or John Candy tried to mobilize the American public to go to war with Canada and it was funny because it was ridiculous, the idea of going to war with Canada, the United States going to war with Canada was simply hard to believe. The democratic peace then has long played a central role in justifying American efforts to expand then number of democratic regimes around the world. More democracies theoretically at least means more partners for cooperation, more durable international settlements, more trade, and thus more peace. Let's now transition from the democratic peace to the historical contours of Wilsonian foreign policy and America's efforts to promote democracy around the world. Values such as democracy promotion have regularly motivated US foreign policy, however, its relative importance in US foreign policy has varied over time. As noted by Encarnación in your reading, the first major wave of democracy promotion in American foreign policy came under Woodrow Wilson and his foreign interventions in Latin America. Encarnación criticizes these interventions as more akin to imperialism by the United States. He saw them as efforts to protect economic interests in a region that was in the United States' sphere of influence rather than a genuine attempt to spread democracy. During the Cold War, the actual practice of promoting democracy arguable took a back seat to the primary mission of containing Communism. In its rhetoric, the United States often continued to talk in terms of the superiority of democracy in its ideological contest with Communism. However in practice, the US regularly allied itself with friendly authoritarian regimes when these regimes would help keep Communist forces from seizing power. The US even actively undermined democratically-inclined, but left leaning government governments that they feared may succumb to influence from the Soviet Union. You can see examples of the preference for anti-Communism over democracy in places like Iran and Chile where the US supported a right-wing anti-Communist dictatorships such as under the Shah in Iran and Augusto Pinochet in Chile. During the height of the Cold War, many politicians and observers argued that the idealism of democracy promotion needed to be subordinated to the realism of containment and American security concerns. In other words, many argued that the US faced the choice -- you could either spread democracy or contain Communism, but in many places, not do both. When faced with this choice during the Cold War, The United States tended to choose containing Communism. Now, the end of the Cold War was a boon for democracy promotion. The collapse of Communist seriously undermined the idea that the US had to choose between pursuing its ideological goal of democracy promotion and the security goal of containing Communism. Rather, the manner in which Communism collapsed and the Cold War ended suggested the exact opposite. The spread of democracy went hand-in-hand with greater security of the United States. One of the biggest reasons that Communism ultimately collapsed in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union was due to internal pressure from citizens living under Communism supporting more freedom and democracy. As thousands of ordinary citizens pressed for greater individual freedoms and democracy, Communist regimes collapsed due to the popular pressure. As a result, Communism and the Soviet Union itself, the greatest threat to American security and the target of more than 40 years of containment policy simply disappeared from the international scene. Not because of US military action, but arguably as a consequence of the spread of democracy. Now, democracy promotion after the Cold War has some highs and lows. The Clinton administration justified his intervention in the former Yugoslavia in part on humanitarian grounds of stopping genocide and in part on the spread of democracy. Clinton even articulated portions of the democratic peace theory when justifying his efforts to expand NATO to Eastern Europe. So the early 1990's was also a height of optimistic expectations regarding the emergence of democracy in post-Communist Russia which had some rather chaotic moods towards democracy under its first popularly elected president Boris Yeltsin. Your reading by Omar Encarnación provides a harsh critique of a Wilsonian foreign policy in democracy promotion. Encarnación argues that democracy promotion as a foundation of US foreign policy rests on three very flawed judgments that Wilson and his successors including most recently George W Bush have made. For Encarnación, these included first, Wilsonian foreign policy assuming that democracy is superior to all other forms of government. As such, promoting democracy in a country that has a dictatorship will always be an improvement. The second assumption, that democracy is a universal value. According to Wilsonians, there are no cultural, social, or economic limitations on the ability of a country to foster and sustain democracy. Democracy can be introduced and will thrive anywhere, even in poor countries or in countries with a non Western cultural tradition. And third, because democracy is always an improvement over authoritarianism, and because its appeal is universal, then the United States has a special moral obligation as the strongest democracy in the world to spread democracy. The United States possesses the military might to topple dictators and usher in democracy. We have the economic power to provide foreign aid to help foster democracy through non-military means. Because democracy is beneficial to both the target country and the United States, according to Wilsonians, the United States then has the power to engineer its adoption around the world and thus the United States should do exactly that. So these are the three fundamental assumptions of Wilsonianism. That democracy is always better than dictatorship, that its appeal is universal, it doesn't have any limits geographically, culturally, economically otherwise, and that the United States has a very special obligation to spread democracy because of the other two. Now, Encarnación finds many faults in this logic. Most importantly, he argues that the United States has not been very successful in its many attempts to introduce democracy around the world, particularly when it uses military force. Put simply, we just are not very good at it. So I urge you to read this article to get a good sense of his entire argument. 