 So now I want to revisit this democratic peace claim in more depth. And despite 30 years of supportive research on the topic, I'm pretty skeptical of the broader claim that democracy promotes peace. And so I'm working on a larger book project, and I just want to give you some of the ground for this skepticism and then weave it into the conversation about democracy promotion as a tool of American grand strategy. And this work, this research that I've been taking a long time to finish... [laughing] was motivated by a couple of questions that remain unanswered and simultaneously challenge the wisdom of promoting democracy in the expectation that peace would follow if we just built a series of democracies around the world. Now, the skepticism is rooted in at least three questions for this research program. And one is one that Rob already mentioned with respect to the Encarnación reading. And it centers on the conditions associated with democratic transitions and how those conditions might influence the foreign policy of the subsequent states. And all we have to do here is look at the Iraqi case to get some reason to question these claims. Because what's happened is you had the initial creation of a democracy and then the collapse into a civil war that created a much larger set of problems for American foreign policy, and so what happened -- The relationship in this case cautions against democracy promotion by suggesting that the long-term benefits of peace that occur potentially after a regime has been consolidated, say 20 years later, those long-term benefits may be out-weighed by the short-term costs of a very deadly war that we have seen in Iraq, and now in Syria. Second, the democratic piece is really a post World War I phenomenon. Before World War I, Democratic states like the United States and Great Britain were relatively more war-like than autocratic states. This is a puzzle for those research programs. How could democracy generate opposite effects before and after 1914? As you might suspect, this led me to ask how American involvement in World War I including President Wilson's efforts to establish the League of Nations, promote democracy and support self-determination, which was really about overturning imperial rule around the world might have contributed to what we now know as the democratic peace? Third, when thinking about democracy is and what our presidents expect democracy in other states to produce with respect to their foreign policy interest, I realized that there was either a contradiction or a naivety in the public debates about how the promotion of democracy might generate new allies for the United States and peace among states. And this contradiction was exposed as I listened to a report on NPR detailing an interview with Condoleezza Rice shortly after Hamas won elections, they were deemed democratic and legitimate by international observers in the Palestinian territories in 2006. I think I might have told this story before in class and if I have, please indulge me. It'll only take a couple more seconds to get through it. So Condoleezza Rice was asked a question about what this electoral victory meant for President Bush's foreign policy agenda focused on democracy promotion. She was basically asked was it a big problem for the policy because a party identified as a terrorist organization by the United States and a party that was staunchly opposed to the existence of the Israeli state won those elections? Democracy itself had produced a government that was completely hostile to American interests. And Rice's answer was telling. It was like she was a deer caught in the headlights whose world view had been completely appended. Frankly, she didn't have a response. Why? Because the beliefs about the foreign policy virtues of democracy are often publicly discussed in the United States. And they forget some very basic implications of the definition of democracy that Rob discussed in the pre-class module. Democracy protects the process by which a group of citizens selects their leaders. It does not however protect the policy outputs that might emerge from that process. And guess what? Everyone around the world does not like America, its values, and its foreign policies. Consequently, we should not expect that these people, when given the chance to voice their opinions in the democratic process will then vote for leaders that adopt foreign policies that are friendly to American interests. Now these critiques led me to an alternative explanation for what appears to be the democratic peace. The claim is that any absence of military conflict among democracies after World War I is not caused by democratic institutions. Instead, any peace has emerged because of great power efforts to shape both the regime type and the foreign policies of smaller states in the international system. And the United States has been at the heart of this effort since the end of World War I. Thus democratic states have been peaceful not because of the effects of democracy but because of their membership in a larger sphere of influence led by the United States. So in other words, I disagree with one of the underlying claims that Rob just discussed in the Encarnación reading. Democracy and the waves of democratization in the international system particularly after World War I and after the Cold War were prompted by larger developments in global politics about relationships between great powers and smaller states and great powers and an imperial collapse. Democratization didn't necessarily emerge in many of these cases from internal political development. I think it's easiest to illustrate this argument with an example that we've discussed in class before. And this is about the German problem in Europe. How was the German problem in Europe resolved? Transforming the continent into an extended zone of peace in the post-World War II era. Was it about the independent of effects? The independent effects of the democratic transition in West Germany. Now simple correlation between aggregate patterns and military conflict in regime type in the case of Germany seems to illustrate the power of the democratic peace proposition. When Germany was autocratic, principally from 1933 to 1945, it fought lots of wars. When West Germany became democratic, the war stopped. What's the problem with this evidence? Quite simply, correlation does not equal causation. Just like West Germany, autocratic East Germany was also peaceful during the Cold War. More importantly, the solution to the German problem rested heavily on the Cold War settlement between the United States and the Soviet Union in Europe. What did they do? The Soviets and the Americans divided Germany into two parts. They then occupied these parts with their own troops, and these military troops provided means to influence the domestic political choices of both governments, namely, democratic West Germany and autocratic East Germany. And this intervention into the domestic politics of these respective states provided a mechanism for the Soviets and the Americans to constrain the foreign policy choices of West Germany and East Germany and pushed them both into a peaceful direction. In other words, the United States and the Soviet Union imposed peace on Germany and the continent during the Cold War. You cannot separate the emergence of democracy in West Germany and it's willingness to abide by this Cold War settlement without understanding American nation building and efforts there, along with the American commitment to protect Western Europe from Soviet expansion. Okay, so what are the implications of these arguments? First, they challenge the conceptual starting point for the democratic peace that I've discussed in prior classes. To understand the foreign policy behavior of states and the likelihood of conflict, I argue that we should start in the larger structure of great power politics rather than with the internal characteristics of states. This means that American foreign policy should probably be oriented around stabilizing relations with great powers like China and Russia. They also suggest that Condoleezza Rice was right back in 2000 when she wrote a campaign piece on foreign affairs for then candidate Bush outlying his foreign policy agenda. Now Rice and Bush were roundly criticized for this agenda after 9/11 because it looked like they were out of touch with a new array of threats in the world that were radically different from the Cold War. Instead, I think their instincts back in 2000 to focus on China and Russia and refrain nation building were probably right. They also challenge an often stated assumption of the democracy promotion rhetoric that the United States can foster democracy in a country like Iraq and then withdraw, setting it free to make its own foreign policy choices and assume complete responsibility for its own security. Instead, I think that peace is still possible, but only via American intervention and support for the democracy. But that peace also emerges from the extension of the American commitment to that country, not just from the internal institutions of democracy in that country. In this way, if the United States wants that country to continue to remain at peace, then the rhetoric of democracy promotion might actually be smuggling in a long term commitment that expands American obligations around the world. 