 Now, this reading is an analysis and a critique of Wilsonian foreign policy. And it answers the question, what is Wilsonianism and why has it degenerated in the perspective of Omar Encarnación into democratic imperialism? So it's both an explanation of the central elements of Wilsonian foreign policy, but also a critique of those central elements. Now, in your pre-class module, we used this reading mostly to summarize the main presumptions of Wilsonianism. Again, being three. Democracy is always superior to other systems of government, and thus an unqualified blessing for those who go through a transition toward democracy. Second, that democracy is a universal value that's applicable to any country, and third, that the United States has a special role in promoting democracy around the world. Your Encarnación reading does a nice job of showing how all three of these presumption are present in President Woodrow Wilson's original justification for promoting democracy in Latin America in the beginning of the 20th century. And he also does a good job of showing how they were central in President George W. Bush's justification for the Iraq War after 9/11. He uses direct quotes from their speeches to showcase how they -- almost verbatim -- made these three central arguments. However, Encarnación, of course, is actually a sharp critic of Wilsonianism and argues strongly against placing democracy promotion at the center of US foreign policy, or at least democracy promotion conducted in a certain way as the center of US foreign policy. So Encarnación, in his intent in articulating the fundamental assumptions of Wilsonianism is to argue that this foreign policy approach is built on three faulty assumptions. And so we should sort of flip the three assumptions that Wilsonians have, on their head to get what the basis of Encarnación's argument really is. Encarnación argues that democracy is not always beneficial in every country. When applied in contexts that will not support democracy are imposed through military force, Encarnación argues that democracy does not make things better, but also actually could make things worse in target countries. Fragile, new democracies often collapse and resort back to dictatorships, leaving deep scars in the country that has experienced this vacillation and experimentation with a democracy that then fails. Negative experiences with democracy can make democracy harder, according to Encarnación, to sustain over the long-term, and can also sour relations between countries and the United States because of the resentment over what target countries sense was imperialism by the United States in the name of democracy promotion. Second, Encarnación argues that democracy is not a universal value. Instead, he argues that countries have huge obstacles to democratization that are very hard to overcome -- or at least certain countries do. And this means that some places are highly resistant to democracy, and perhaps it is best not to try to impose a democratic order on countries that are not equipped or ready to sustain democracy. And finally this article argues that the United States should not assume a special role to promote democracy. And that such a missionary zeal to spread democracy often means imposing democracy through force, that can have negative consequences. Such an approach, he argues, often does damage to American interests and international prestige. So underlying Encarnación's critique of Wilsonianism in sort of challenging the three fundamental assumptions of Wilsonianism are two main points. So first, Encarnación thinks that Wilsonianism misjudges the democratic peace theory. Encarnación argues that the democratic peace theory only works between developed democracies, and only applies to interstate conflicts. Conflicts between countries. While established democracies like the United States and European countries tend not to fight one another, new democracies, according to a lot of research cited by Encarnación are actually more prone to aggression and civil wars. And in fact, there's growing arguments and theories out there that the initial transition to democracy tends to foster forces like nationalism which can then result in violence between rival ethnic groups and civil war in countries that undergo democratic transition. And so in one sense, what Encarnación is arguing is that sure, there might be an argument for established democracies not fighting one-another, but this fixation on that axiom in political science that democracies don't fight one-another misjudges the route to countries becoming democracies and how dangerous that route is when it comes to internal conflicts within these countries and aggression by these countries to their neighbors. Secondly, Encarnación argues that Wilsonianism misjudges the process of democratization, which is the process of transforming authoritarian regimes into democracies. That's what democratization refers to. For Encarnación, democratization is mostly driven by internal forces that the United States has very little control over. And so democratization, the ability of a country that is authoritarian to become a democracy, is driven not by anything that the United States can do, but rather by long-term social forces within countries. And so because of this dynamic, successful long-term democratization is likely only once a certain level of economic development is achieved, according to many scholars, and other conducive social conditions such as a democratic culture, or a vibrant civil society, or the proper political institutions, are in place that enables society to organize and mobilize itself, and to sustain a democratic competitive politics. So this is Encarnación's central critique, is that the United States has misinterpreted both the process of democratization and the idea of the democratic peace, and has followed an unsuccessful and unwise strategy of placing at the center of its foreign policy, democracy promotion. And so -- and he gives numerous examples from Woodrow Wilson's experience in trying to promote democracy in Latin America, and also using an analogy, some of the difficulties that President Bush experienced in the same efforts in the Middle East. Now, what's his final conclusion? So if democracy is so problematic, does Encarnación argue that the United States should risk the urge of spreading democracy altogether? This is not exactly his final conclusion. What he concludes in this article is that the United States should continue to promote democracy, but not by imposition through military force. Instead, it should promote democracy by cultivating the underlying conditions that are conducive to long-term democratic development. Taking a more hands-off approach, taking a more long-term approach, and concentrating on those gradual developments that may some day contribute to the target countries undergoing a sort of native and endogenous internal process of democratization. 