 This module continues our discussion of the role played by military force in structuring international politics in U.S. foreign policy. We shift from the use of military force to the role played by threats to use military force in shaping political interactions amongst states, such threats became central to great power peace with the advent of nuclear weapons. The first segment discusses the unique nature of nuclear weapons, it asks whether nuclear weapons are qualitatively different from other weapons, and if so how? The second segment moves to the concept of nuclear deterrence. We define deterrence, and also explain a series of elements that animate the turns theory. We then talk about mutually assured destruction or MAD, the concept of total war, and how it relates to nuclear weapons these discussions include a short video segment from the movie War Games off Youtube, and a question and answer segment from a prior class to reinforce the definition of deterrence. The third section discussed the challenges associated with making threats credible, credible threats require that an adversary believes that you might actually execute the threat you are making. Once the United States and the Soviet Union both acquired secure second strike capability, the stability of the Cold War rested significantly on this element of nuclear strategy, a focus on credibility really moves the contest from one resting on the balance of military forces to one resting on the balance of political will on the opposing sides. The fourth segment shows how the possibility of national missile defense could undermine the stability associated with the possession of secure second strike capabilities by rivals. The fifth segment confronts the political challenges posed by nuclear proliferation to the United States. The sixth segment overviews the practical ethics of nuclear deterrence, a situation that paradoxically protects a civilian population from enemy attack by making them more vulnerable to such an attack. Finally the seventh segment discusses the Mandelbaum reading assigned for this module that confronts the dilemma of how best to prevent Iran from acquiring a nuclear weapon. 