 The first thing we want to talk about is the idea of the impact of nuclear weapons on war in general and the question is, are nuclear weapons qualitatively different from other weapons and do they change the nature of warfare, and thus have to be used and treated differently? Now the Cold War historian John Lewis Gaddis, who actually was a UT grad, I learned that the other day, argues that ultimately, this would be the case, but originally, nuclear weapons were perceived to be like any other weapon. Once developed, it was assumed by generals and presidents in the early part of the Cold War that they would be used. And this assumption was based on historical experience. Other weapons, were thought to be too terrible too be used on the battlefield when they were first developed as well. Going all the way back to the crossbow, which penetrated armor, or the machine gun in the period right around World War I, those were thought to be revolutionary weapons that perhaps shouldn't be used because of their impact on the way war would be waged only to have the stigma against their use fade rather quickly. So weapons tend to be used if they are developed. The one partial exception in addition to nuclear weapons have been chemical weapons which were used rather extensively in World War I, but have been restricted in their use ever since. Now, we have to ask the question though, what exactly is it about nuclear weapons that have made their use except for the two atomic bombs dropped on Japan to end world War II so rare? Aerial bombing from airplanes have destroyed whole cities during World War II and in other wars so the fact that nuclear weapons tend to target population centers and civilians cannot be established as the distinguishing factors that separate nuclear weapons from other kinds of weapons. Rather, it is the magnitude of destruction from a potential nuclear war that makes the use of these weapons so difficult to comprehend. When thermonuclear weapons, such as the hydrogen bomb were developed, it was so powerful that it had no rational use in war-fighting, given the destruction it would cause. In 1956, it was estimated that a -- and this is pretty early days, 1956, the Cold War was around ten years old. It was estimated that a Soviet attack on the United States with nuclear weapons would destroy the whole government and kill 65 percent of the US population. President Dwight D. Eisenhower concluded that war implies contest, but nuclear war came closer to destruction of your enemy and suicide for yourself. And so Eisenhower famously stated, declared that if war, nuclear war he was talking about, he said, quote, "you might as well go out and shoot everyone you see and then shoot yourself." So the key difference between nuclear weapons and other weapons became their destructive capacity and we will return to this in a little while in our discussion of total war. War was meant to achieve something, right? A goal, it was to capture territory or repel attack or defeat an enemy or defend the state. The problem with nuclear weapons was that after a nuclear war, there arguably would be nothing left. It would mean the very destruction of human civilization. What was truly remarkable according to Gaddis in his histories, various books on particularly the beginning of the Cold War was that countries as different as the United States and the Soviet Union and leaders as dissimilar as Harry Truman and Joseph Stalin seemed to come to the same conclusion about the nature of nuclear weapons. They were very cautious. Despite having these weapons and threatening their use, they scrupulously avoided not only using them against each other, but also getting into any military conflict that could escalate to the point of using nuclear weapons even though they completely mistrusted one another and believed the other side was prepared to annihilate them with these very same weapons. 