 I want to talk a little bit more about the challenges of making credible threats in a nuclear world. The nuclear world really presents a paradox about the role of violence in creating international political order. Nukes are really important. They shape the state's behavior, and they seem to promote peace, yet they don't get used. Why? The obvious answer is that they are horrible weapons that could literally kill millions of people if they're used. States choose not to employ them because they believe that they will suffer unacceptable costs in retaliation if they choose to use them, but this possibility opens up a bigger puzzle. Why do political officials believe these threats when they're made? Because if they don't believe the threats, then the threats really have minimal significance in international politics. The point of this discussion about credibility is to reinforce how different the nuclear world is. Political order among the great powers rests on threats to use military force, rather than the use of military force. Notice the subtle, but important, difference here. This is about non-use rather than use. These threats are worthless though, unless they are credible, so what is credibility? For a threat to be credible, the target of the threat has to believe that the sender of the threat will actually follow through on the promise to use nuclear weapons if they do something that they were told not to do. So, now we are moving into the world, or into a world, of beliefs and perceptions. Peace in the nuclear world depends on the stability of these beliefs. So for the rest of this section, I want to talk about three basic challenges associated with making credible threats and as a consequence creating political stability among nuclear-armed states. The first focuses on what we may describe as the political will, or resolve, to launch nuclear weapons. Resolve is often thought of as a measure of the scope of costs that some actor's willing to suffer to achieve some tangible political benefit. In other words, if the actors really want something, they will be willing to pay lots of costs to secure it. The second refers to the capability to execute the threats. Threats can't be credible unless the sender actually has the means to follow through. For example, Rob might threaten to pummel me in some MMA cage match, but we would all, as everyone is doing in the studio right now, we would all simple scoff at such a threat. I mean, look at him. He's getting a little long in the tooth, and he's smaller than me as we just saw. He might have been a state high school football champion, but that was 30 years ago. [laughs] The threat is just not credible. >> [inaudible]. >> The same applies to international politics. The Bahamas cannot threaten to go to war against the United States if they want some change in American trade policy because they don't have the means to execute that threat. Third, we're going to talk a bit about the complications associated with using nuclear threats to protect allies. So, the first pre-requisite of a credible threat means possessing the military means to execute it. Crucial here is what Rob described as secure second strike capabilities. Some nuclear weapons that cannot be destroyed in a surprise first attack by an adversary. Secure second strike capabilities means the possession of nuclear weapons that cannot be destroyed in a surprise first strike by your adversary. If this condition exists, then your adversary will not launch a nuclear strike against you because they can't get all of your weapons in a first strike. Then, your remaining weapons could be used to impose unacceptable costs on your adversary, so they choose not to launch that strike in the first place. During the Cold War, the development of intercontinental ballistic missiles -- missiles that left the atmosphere and -- from one continent and were able to strike targets in another continent -- and then submarine launched ballistic missiles, missiles that were launched out of submarines, really enhanced nuclear stability because it was essentially impossible to eliminate all of these weapons in a first strike. Imagine the difficulties of taking out all the American subs, in the oceans around the world, with nuclear weapons in a first strike. The Soviet Union would have had to first locate all the subs around the globe, and the would have had to have been able to coordinate an attack, a successful attack, on all of them simultaneously. This was essentially an impossible task. Thus, American possession of submarine launched ballistic missiles enhanced the credibility of the larger nuclear deterrent by creating the capacity to inflict huge losses on the Soviets if they launched a first strike. Now, this wasn't the case in the early stages of the Cold War, when the United States had few nuclear weapons, and these nuclear weapons had to be delivered with strategic bombers, with planes. These strategic bombers on their own, were vulnerable. They could be destroyed on the ground or in the air. This vulnerability thus helped to challenge the credibility of the American threat to respond to any Soviet aggression with nuclear strikes. Now the second component of a credible threat is effectively about shaping the beliefs of an adversary, so that they think you will actually have an interest in executing that threat when it comes time to do so. Now, people questioned this in the Cold War, and you should think about it this way: Imagine you are the president, and you have threatened to launch nuclear weapons if the Soviets launched a nuclear strike against you. The Soviets launch a limited nuclear strike against south Florida during the Cuban Missile Crisis. Do you really want then want to kill tens of millions of people in Soviet cities, then facing the possibility that the Soviets will respond again, after your response, by destroying New York City, Washington D.C., Boston, or Chicago? Some people worried that American presidents would flinch in a crisis, and not give the order to take out Moscow after an initial strike on Miami. Now, this created a huge problem then, if Soviet leaders believed that an American president would flinch. If Soviets believed that the American president would flinch, then they might test him by taking West Berlin, and then the whole western alliance could come unraveled in Europe. So, how did presidents demonstrate their resolve, or their willingness, to make these threats and then execute them? They would try to make irrevocable commitments. In a sense, tie their hands so they couldn't back down in a crisis. Now, one way to do this in a democracy is simply to make public threats. Under these conditions, if a president then backs down he looks weak to his domestic audience and faces the possibility of getting thrown out of office in the next election. President Kennedy did this in the Cuban Missile Crisis. He went on TV, and said publicly that Soviet nukes would not be allowed to stay in Cuba. By heightening his political costs for backing down, he helped to convince the Soviets that he would follow through on the threats necessary to get Soviet nukes out of Cuba. Another way to solve this credibility problem is to make threats that leave something to chance. These are threats to escalate a crisis with a nuclear-armed state. Perhaps having strategic nuclear bombers take off from their base, and then fly along the border of a potential target. In these circumstances, when the bombers go out, the president, the person that's supposed to be ultimately responsible for making the decision to go to war, has just lost some control of the situation. He has ceded, or delegated, control over the weapons to those pilots flying along that border, and he ceded the power to make that ultimate decision to their discretion. And guess what? Something could go wrong in such a military exercise that leads to an accidental or unauthorized launch. Maybe the bombers get shot down, and drop their nukes on a city before crashing. If you've ever seen the movie "Crimson Tide" -- this is a 90's reference, my decade -- with Denzel Washington and Gene Hackman, you can see these dynamics at work. So their commander is on a submarine, and their submarine gets cut off from communications with the Pentagon right in the middle of receiving what appears to be an order to launch nuclear weapons against Russia. This occurs when there's a rise of the Nationalist party in Russia in the mid 1990's. Washington and Hackman then engage in a protracted struggle, on the sub, with mutinies and counter-mutinies over whether or not they should execute an unclear order about whether to launch nukes. This is an example of a threat that leaves something to chance. Once those subs go out there's a risk that they don't follow orders, and either launch or stand down -- launch a nuclear strike or stand down in a nuclear crisis. This possibility, this delegation of authority, and opening up the possibility of an unauthorized, or accidental, strike enhances a state's credibility when making threats, even though the strike might be accidental. The willingness to gamble and lose control over events, then helps to demonstrate resolve, relative to the issue at stake, and the threat to use nuclear weapons to achieve that goal becomes more credible. Now, the challenge of making credible threats gets really complicated with respect to alliance relations during the Cold War. This is the third component of credibility that I want to discuss. Because the United States didn't station enough troops in Western Europe to defeat the Soviet Army in a ground war. Peace during the Cold War rested heavily on American threats to launch nuclear weapons against Moscow if the Soviet Union invaded West Germany. Here was the dilemma, though: Once the Soviets had lots of nuclear bombs, would the United States really want to execute that threat to launch a nuke against Moscow after Soviet tanks had rolled into West Berlin? If the Soviets could then take out New York City. Allies worried that the United States would walk away from this situation unwilling to sacrifice millions of New Yorkers to protect Germans in West Berlin. Now, this possibility created two new problems. First, if the Soviets doubted the credibility of the American threat, then they might just go ahead and take West Berlin. Second, if the Europeans doubted that the United States would actually execute that threat, then the Europeans might decide just to opt out of the alliance, moving to the Soviet side, or simply opting for neutrality, leaving the United States to confront the Soviet Union on its own. These solutions to the credibility problem during the Cold War rested on an additional means of making irrevocable commitments. The most famous one was, and is, the stationing of American troops in West Berlin and the Korean peninsula. Their military function was actually a political one. And this is harsh, but it's true. Their function was to die. Troops in these regions, and troops in the demilitarized zone in Korea today. Why? They were grossly out-manned. Instead, political strategists believed it would be impossible for the United States to detach, or stand down, from these crises if tens of thousands of American troops were killed. Either in Korea or in West Berlin. So, their stationing in these hot zones were then commitment mechanisms designed to ensure that the United States would execute its threats to protect Western Europe. And the last solution to this problem, with respect to the alliance relationship, which was contemplated by Eisenhower, something that we already discussed. If the Europeans or the Soviets doubted the American threat to launch nuclear weapons, then it was possible simply to just bypass the American president by giving nuclear weapons to the West Germans. We learned though, a few weeks ago, about how this possibility actually destabilized the Cold War by reactivating the German problem, and the United States eventually backs away from this option. Okay, so let's take a step back, and review this odd concept of credibility. In a nuclear world, peace rests on threats to use violence, not the actual deployment of military force. To be effective, these threats have to be credible, which means your adversary believes that you will actually follow through on these promises to inflict huge costs when push comes to shove. We then discussed three aspects of this credibility problem. Credibility depends on possessing the capabilities to execute these threats, and the political will or resolve to do so. It can be difficult to convince another side of this resolve, so states have to communicate that resolve. Democratic leaders can do this by making threats. All states can try to solve this credibility problem with threats that leave something to chance, which is essentially escalating a crisis while knowing that you might not be able to stand down or prevent a nuclear strike from occurring once the crisis has broken out. 