 MAD was stable because neither side had an incentive to attack since both sides would be destroyed in that attack. But what if you could defend against a nuclear attack? This would require the military capacity to either destroy an opponent's nuclear weapons before they were launched or to shoot down incoming missiles before they reach their targets. Wouldn't such a situation be safer and even more moral? Ronald Reagan believes so and this really motivated his policy initiative that was labeled Star Wars, or SDI, the Strategic Defense Initiative. This proposed program that never really got off the ground and is still not scientifically possible involved relying on a series of satellite weapons orbiting in space above the Earth's atmosphere to destroy Soviet missiles while they were in flight. This military capacity to shoot down incoming missiles potentially could shift the nuclear world from one based on deterrence to one based, again, on defense. You would be defending against a nuclear attack. An effective anti-ballistic missile program could prevent an enemy from physically harming a civilian population. Your cities would no longer be held hostage by the threat of nuclear annihilation because the missiles would not get through. All of this sounds pretty good, right? Like it could provide a moral way to protect Americans in a nuclear world. Unfortunately, this situation is much more complicated than that and Reagan's decision to minimize these complications helped escalate the Cold War dangerously during his first term. The potential for an effective missile defense system could undermine secure second-strike capability. Remember, military stability and peace during the Cold War rested on secure second-strike capability. The fear that secure second-strike capability by one side could be eliminated through national missile defense risked tempting the Soviet Union into a nuclear first strike before its nuclear weapons became obsolete through something like the SDI. The Soviets worried that the United States might launch a nuclear first-strike once the United States possessed missile defense. Under these conditions, the US could launch a first-strike and take out a series of Soviet cities or Soviet nuclear weapons. The Soviets would respond then with their own nuclear retaliatory strikes. However, the number of these retaliatory strikes would be diminished because the United States would have destroyed some portion of the Soviet arsenal in a surprise first-strike. Even more problematic for nuclear stability, the United States could blunt or eliminate the costs associated with the Soviet retaliatory strikes by destroying some of their incoming missiles. The Soviets could then lose the capacity to deter the United States from launching a nuclear strike in the first place because Soviet weapons would be destroyed in a coordinated attack. The first wave would take out Soviet nukes on the ground and the second wave would take out Soviet nukes in the air. These Soviet fears destabilized the Cold War during Reagan's first term because the Soviets felt pressured to accelerate the Cold War. They felt like they had few options. One included an attempt to try and win the nuclear war against the United States before SDI, or the Strategic Defense Initiative, became even close to being operational. Alternatively, the Soviets thought that they could try to accelerate the nuclear arms race so they had the military capacity to overwhelm any American defense system with too many nuclear strikes. You can see though that either choice carried the risk of further heightening the tensions associated with the Cold War. In sum, this discussion has been meant to illustrate how national missile defense can be destabilizing to international politics. It carries the risk of compromising mutually assured destruction. As a consequence, states might have increased incentives to engage in nuclear war or accelerate an arms race when faced with this potential. This same set of strategic pressures exist today as the United States works to bolster its capacity to shoot down incoming ballistic missiles in eastern Europe, Asia, and the Middle East. While administrations always claim that these efforts are designed to protect American civilians or American allies from a nuclear attack by a rogue regime like Iran and North Korea, Russia worries instead that it is the real target of these weapons programs. 