 I want to talk a little bit about the challenges associated with nuclear proliferation. We're going to discuss this in terms of something called "horizontal proliferation," which is simply the acquisition of nuclear bombs by more countries. Since the end of the Cold War, there has been a spirited, academic debate about whether proliferation will stabilize, or destabilize international politics, and you might think about stability here in terms of the preservation of peace. So, will nuclear proliferation lead to less or more war? There are two broad debating positions offering opposite, as you might expect, answers to these questions. The pessimists worry that the new states acquiring nuclear weapons will be fundamentally different from prior ones. Think concerns leveled about Iran in this context. These states are likely to be underdeveloped with weaker internal institutions of governance including civilian control over the military. So these states might be more prone to accidental, or unauthorized -- say by a rogue general -- use of nuclear weapons than either the Soviets or the Americans were during the Cold War. Now, alternatively optimists argue that the destructiveness of nuclear weapons generates tremendous caution on the part of their possessors. This extreme caution helps to freeze the political status quo among states, in large part by raising the costs of war to ridiculously unacceptable levels. Thus nukes might actually stabilize world politics. So now let's look at each of these positions in more detail, and then talk a little bit about U.S. foreign policy on the question of nuclear proliferation. Optimists, nuclear optimists, focus on the tremendous restraint activated by nuclear weapons. Nuclear weapons limit aggression, or attempts to revise the territorial status quo because of their extreme costs. They also argue that secure second strike capabilities are fairly easy to achieve with much fewer weapons than the United States and the Soviets deemed as necessary, or that they possessed during the Cold War. For example, you spread out a small number of nuclear weapons throughout your country, say 10, use mobile launchers or simply hide them. This strategy then makes it very hard for an adversary to locate them, unless they have incredibly good intelligence. And you have to be able to locate these weapons as a prerequisite for a successful first strike. So, unable to achieve a successful first strike, states have to then opt not to use nuclear weapons in the first place. So, along these lines, there have been stories that Iran has constructed a complicated underground tunnel system to ensure that the United States can't find nukes and then take them out in a preventive strike -- sorry, in a preemptive strike. Which makes it much more difficult to use military force to threaten to get Iran to change its behavior. Optimists also argue that the presence of nuclear weapons actually help to contain fighting in a war. So the story here is not just about preventing a war from occurring, but also if a crisis breaks out and there's small levels of scrimmages, nuclear weapons contain the level of violence. States have to be very cautious of escalating to higher levels of violence once engaged in a war because each new step could bring a retaliatory nuclear strike. So because they are such game changers, optimists also argue that states have strong incentives to maintain tight control over their nuclear weapons. Because they're so valuable to their national defense, states wouldn't want to share them with another state or a terrorist organization that could ultimately choose targets for their benefactor at some point in the future. So the claim here is Iran is -- what an optimist would say -- Iran is a state sponsor of terrorism, but they're not going to want to give a nuclear weapon, if they have a successful nuclear program, to a terrorist organization because what happens if that terrorist organization then launches an unauthorized strike from Tehran against an American city? Then all of the sudden, the United States responds against Iran. So, the claim here that optimists make is that nuclear-armed states aren't going to share them with terrorist organizations. Now, pessimists counter these claims by arguing that any new entrants into the nuclear club will be fundamentally different from existing nuclear weapon states. And these differences will heighten the risks of nuclear war. First, new members of the nuclear club are likely to be poorer and have fewer nuclear weapons than say the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War. This possibility challenges the idea that the establishment of secure second strike capabilities would be easy to achieve. If these states only posses a few weapons when they go nuclear, then an adversary may opt to launch a preemptive strike and take out the nukes while they can still locate them all. In this way, a small nuclear force might invite an attack, and this is one of the concerns with Iran's fledgling nuclear weapons program. Will Israel -- if they go nuclear, will Israel be tempted to try and take out two or three weapons before they have ten or fifteen? Second, new members to the nuclear club may not have the organizational means to maintain control over them. There is a trade off between readiness, or the ability to launch nuclear weapons quickly in a crisis, and safety. Some theorists argue that some military organizations around the world, particularly in developing societies, tend to value readiness more than safety. They want to make sure that they can use nuclear weapons to offset some conventional disadvantage if necessary. This means that there may be a greater risk of unauthorized or accidental use in a crisis. And think here about rogue generals that you see in movies, opting to sell a nuclear to a terrorist organization. The larger point is that there is a possibility that new entrants to the nuclear club lack the domestic institutional means to control their use. Finally there's the possibility that the pursuit, this is the Iran example that I just gave you -- the possibility that the pursuit, rather than the possession of nuclear weapons, increases the likelihood of war. And, as I mentioned, the Israeli-Iranian conflict illustrates this possibility. Israel has put a lot of pressure on the United States to launch or permit Israel to launch a preemptive attack against Iran to eliminate their nuclear weapons program. This pressure was much more intense in the latter years of the Bush administration. Israel is worried about a future Iranian nuclear attack against them so they want to prevent that possibility by denying Iran nuclear weapons. So now lets talk about US interests with respect to proliferation. When we discussed the early stages of the cold war, we talked about how the nuclear issue helped to shape this conflict in Europe through the Test Ban Treaty in 1964. At that point the United States and the Soviet Union cut a deal that was designed to prevent new states from acquiring nuclear weapons. Since then, the United States has long had a robust counter-proliferation policy. Now the motivation behind this policy are multiple. First there are standard pessimist concerns oriented around reducing the likelihood of all types of nuclear attack against the United States -- intentional, unauthorized or accidental. There is another set of interests here at work though. Nuclear weapons are the great equalizer in international politics. They essentially take the possibility of military invasion against them off the table. So here's the concern. If Iran gets nuclear weapons, the United States can't threaten war via conventional military means to get Iran to do something that they might otherwise not do. So these weapons blunt the huge advantage in conventional military forces. That is huge technologically proficient armies that are possessed by great powers. This is one of the reasons that both the United States and the Soviet Union could agree in the 1960's that they wanted to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. If they are the only ones that posses nuclear weapons, they can still coerce, say with threats of regime change, states that do not posses nuclear weapons. However that threat to coerce states becomes much less credible if the target can deter an invasion by threatening to launch a nuclear weapon against an American city. In this way as more states possess nuclear weapons, the territorial status quo among them freezes and United States has fewer military means by which to alter their foreign policy. Now you can see these dynamics and how the United States has interacted with Iran, Iraq and North Korea. States that president Bush labels as the Axis of Evil after 9/11. Iraq doesn't have nuclear weapons, it gets invaded, North Korea has nuclear weapons it gets bargained with, Iran -- it then creates incentives for Iran to get nuclear weapons and now with the possibility that Iran has a nuclear weapons program. What's happening? They're getting negotiated with as well. The possession of nuclear weapons by more states around the world influences and potentially limits the power of the United States. 