 Let me discuss some of the practical ethics surrounding nuclear deterrence. Now, nuclear weapons and nuclear deterrents have posed serious complications for the ethics of war in general and for just war theory because of the destructive capacity of nuclear war. Now I want to present to you several competing perspectives regarding the ethics of nuclear deterrence. So first, there is the position that our moral values prohibit nuclear deterrence. From this perspective, nuclear deterrence is based on a hostage-holding scenario in which states threaten to kill millions of non-combatants in retaliation for an attack. Those targeted in this deterrence threat are arguably innocent people who are not party to the conflict necessarily whose freedom and security are wrongly deprived. In terms of proportionality, of means to ends, no goal is worthy enough to justify threatening to kill millions and millions of innocent non-involved persons in order to achieve it. So, there's that perspective. From the opposite perspective however, there are those who defend nuclear deterrence on ethical grounds as moral, claiming that nuclear deterrence is not only ethically justifiable, but some go so far as to say it's ethically required in a world with nuclear weapons. Now how can this be? This position is based on consequences and is closet in approach to the utilitarian ethical framework which emphasizes results and in terms of results, one can argue that nuclear deterrence is a bloodless strategy -- no one ever is killed because the stakes are so high. Under MAD, mutually assured destruction, when everyone was at risk of being killed, then leaders avoided war, thus saving lives. In fact, those in favor of nuclear deterrence on ethical grounds argue that abandoning a nuclear deterrence policy would result in more human casualties, not less, by making war less final and terrible, and thus more tempting. Consequently, ending nuclear deterrence would potentially cause greater harm. Finally, one must acknowledge that the precepts of just war theory especially the just conduct of war provisions of the theory are very difficult to reconcile with the use of nuclear weapons. If ever used, nuclear weapons arguably results in unjust conduct of war because it violates principles of proportionality and discrimination by explicitly targeting large civilian populations and wiping them out. There is no discrimination between combatants and non-combatants and no proportionalities since the magnitude of destruction of a nuclear war would wipe out all of human civilization or close to it. No war aims would be worth that. And if it is unethical to use nuclear weapons then from just war theory, it is probably unethical to threaten to use them. The winning move is not to play. 