 We will now turn to the reading by Mandelbaum and show how first assumptions regarding the instability of nuclear proliferation led Mandelbaum to argue forcefully for a deterrent threat to use military force to prevent Iran from attaining a nuclear weapon. But second, that problems with clarity of the message revolving around deterrence and the credibility of the deterrent threat make a deterrent strategy regarding Iran attaining a nuclear weapon difficult to execute. So we'll take these two separately. The first thing to note is that Mandelbaum starts from a specific perspective on nuclear proliferation. He's a nuclear pessimist when it comes to Iran at least. And thus sees the spread of nuclear weapons to Iran as inherently dangerous. So Mandelbaum argues that Iran must not be allowed to get a nuclear weapon and he bases this assumption on a few very specific elements. As Mandelbaum admits, the United States has allowed other states like the Soviet Union, Israel, India, Pakistan, and even North Korea more recently to acquire nuclear weapons. So the question is what makes Iran different from those earlier cases? What evidence does Mandelbaum present to support his assumption of pessimism that Iran must not be allowed to attain a nuclear weapon because it would be so destabilizing. So let's look at that argument. First, Mandelbaum argues that virtually all sides of the debate within the United States in the domestic realm agree that Iran should not be allowed to attain a nuclear weapon. Both advocates and critics of the Iran nuclear deal-- agree on this point. So he presents his perspective that nuclear proliferation in Iran is dangerous rather than potentially stabilizing, as a nuclear optimists might argue, as uncontroversial. And enjoying bipartisan' support. So his first line of argumentation is simply to state how broadly elements within the United States agree that Iran must not be provided with the opportunity to gain a nuclear weapon. Secondly, he gets more specific about the reasons regarding what makes a nuclear Iran so dangerous. And so in this instance, he argues that unlike North Korea, and Iranian nuclear bomb would spark regional nuclear proliferation. Mandelbaum argues in the North Korean case that regional proliferation of nuclear weapons to South Korea or Japan was less likely when North Korea was developing its nuclear weapon because of a long history of deterrence against North Korea's use of force against its neighbors. And this deterrent threat was backed by a decade long strong military presence by the United States in the region dating back to the Korean War. Because of this American deterrent, North Korea's neighbors did not feel the need to arm themselves with nuclear weapons to protect themselves if North Korea got a nuclear bomb. Mandelbaum argues this is not the case in the middle East. Now why is that? He doesn't explicitly say but he implies that US military commitments to Iran's neighbors like Saudi Arabia are less secured. And you could argue and say this is especially demonstrated in light of friendlier relations between the United States and Iran in the wake of the Iran nuclear deal. And so unlike South Korea in which the United States went to war in the Korean war to protect eventually after the partition that country from aggression from North Korea. There is, in Mandelbaum's argument, some less security in the American commitment to protect against Iranian aggression. Next, Mandelbaum argues that nuclear proliferation in the Middle East would be particularly dangerous. And again, he makes a comparison, a historical comparison. He says, "Unlike Mutually Assured Destruction between the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War, nuclear competition in the Middle East would involve numerous states" More than two right? Iran and Israel plus potentially Saudi Arabia and others. That is distinctly separate or different from the dynamic in the Cold War between the two superpowers. Moreover, the states involved in this regional nuclear competition would have small nuclear arsenals that were relatively insecure and thus vulnerable to attack. There would not be a second strike capability, the ability to withstand a first strike and then launch a devastating counterattack. Instead, in this regional nuclear competition, the country that attacked first would gain the advantage. This would change arguably all of the incentives. Instead of nuclear weapons making countries in the region more cautious and wary of starting a war as nuclear deterrence appeared to do between the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War, the presence of nuclear weapons in the region would incentivise states to attack first before one's enemies could launch the first strike and take out your nuclear deter. Next, Mandelbaum adds another point. Not only is nuclear proliferation in Iran more dangerous than it was in North Korea, but preventing Iran from getting a nuclear weapon would actually be easier, he argues, than preventing North Korean nuclear weapon was. Now why is this? Mandelbaum argues that most importantly this is because Iran's neighbors are on board with the US's back deter strategy against Iran. In North Korea, South Korea opposed US military intervention in North Korea to prevent it from gaining a nuclear weapon because South Korea was particularly wary that US military intervention in North Korea would mean a North Korean attack on South Korea, potentially with nuclear weapons. But in the case of Iran, Iran's neighbors have signaled that they would not oppose US military intervention in Iran to prevent it from requiring a nuclear weapon. So Mandelbaum is convinced that Iran must not be allowed to have a nuclear weapon and that the deterrent strategy would be easier in Iran than it was in North Korea. So it should be noted here that Mandelbaum does not, let me repeat, does not take a position, at least explicitly on the Iran nuclear deal. He presents both the pros and cons of the deal and he suggests that-- he treats it as something of a given. Instead, he asks kind of a different question. What should the United States do in addition to the current agreement? In particular, what should the United States do if Iran cheats on the current agreement? Or the deal that has been fashioned by the Obama administration is canceled at a later date under a new administration? Or what should the US do when the deal eventually expires in ten years or a bit later? Second, Mandelbaum does not accept the Obama administration's current strategy of reimposing economic sanctions if Iran cheats. He dismisses the idea of this snap back economic sanctions as a viable deterrent strategy, arguing that it's unrealistic once the sanctions are lifted. Mostly because American allies would not go along once Iran is freed from these sanctions as it has been since the deal has gone into effect. Instead, what Mandelbaum argues is , for a military deterrent strategy, threatening military intervention if Iran tries to get a nuclear weapon either during that term of the deal, or after or if the deal is canceled. Here Mandelbaum makes a crucial distinction about this American deterrent strategy. He argues that the historical American deterrent strategy against the Soviet Union during the Cold War was the deterrent strategy against attack by the Soviet Union towards the United States or its allies. In the current circumstance with Iran, deterrence against Iran is intended to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons in the first place. Once Iran would acquire nuclear weapon, there would be a further decision process about whether to use those weapons or not and under what circumstances. Mandelbaum seems to argue here that deterring attack is easier and more straightforward than deterring nuclear proliferation and we'll get to why that is the case in just a second. So let's now move on to the problems one might expect from executing the deterrent strategy that Mandelbaum is proposing. First Mandelbaum provides two requirements for an effective deterrent threat against an Iranian nuclear bomb. First effective deterrence requires clarity and second credibility. By clarity, Mandelbaum means that the US must be very clear what actions would prompt military response by the US. And by credibility, Mandelbaum means that Iran must be convinced that the US would follow through with its threat. Now this sounds easy enough but of course, there are some problems both with clarity and credibility in this particular case. He lists two problems with clarity. First, defining what violations would trigger military response. It's complicated. As he points out, Iran could take a number of little steps towards developing a nuclear weapon in which any single item on those many steps would not necessarily be severe enough to require a military response. But that that cumulative effect of all those little steps over time would the development of a nuclear bomb. You can see a potential example of this with the recent missile launches by Iran. Iran tested some missiles recently that the US saw as threatening and potentially arguing would be a violation not of the nuclear agreement between Iran and the United States and other nations, but of a separate UN resolution. Iran argued instead that since it's not developing a nuclear weapon, those UN resolutions are sort of moot in the missile test were not a violation of anything. So you can see how this dynamic of defining what is or is not a violation could get pretty complicated. Secondly, there are potential problems with detecting violations. And this was a major criticism of the nuclear deal in the first place. The United States may not be able to see if Iran cheats. Because the inspection regime just is not strong enough. And once we've come to the realization that Iran has been cheating, it might be too late. Finally, Mandelbaum makes an argument about credibility. And he argues that the problem with credibility is previous US behavior. That in the past, United States has demonstrated not through its words but through its actions that it might be tolerant of steps taken by Iran to develop a nuclear program. For years, the United States did not take any military action, and did not take any other political action, or strong enough political action to stop Iran's development of a nuclear program. And more recently, actions by president Obama such as the Nuclear Deal itself, but also the failure of president Obama to enforce his red line against the use of chemical weapons by Syria with military force may lead Iran's leaders to doubt the US threat of military intervention. So Mandelbaum says we need to make a deterrent threat. It needs to be credible but our own behavior in the past makes credibility an issue and an open question. Perhaps Iran just will not believe the threat. So what is United States to do? What Mandelbaum, and this is the final point, offers is the same advice that advocates of deterrence have always offered when trying to bolster the credibility of a deterrent threat. The state issuing the deterrent threat needs to take some extra steps to be credible. First, the Obama administration and Congress need to very clearly and resolutely articulate the deterrent threat. And everyone needs to be sort of on the same page. There can't be contrasting voices and contrasting signals about how serious United States is. But second, the United States needs to bolster its deterrent threat with greater military presence in the Middle East. And by putting more military presence in the Middle East, it'd be more difficult for the United States to back down if Iran tries to get a nuclear weapon. And that, therefore, increases the credibility of the threat that we will actually use military force if Iran starts to get a nuclear weapon. >> So there's a couple of questions that have popped up on nuclear deterrence, the conditions that it's stable and unstable. So I want to take a few of these questions before we move into the news. And the first one is, "I'm having a hard time understanding the concept of military coercion in the context of how it is taken off the table for the United States and other great powers. Would you explain this concept in greater detail?" And this goes back to the uncertainty or concern on the part of the superpowers over whether or not they can control military escalation with nuclear weapons in a crisis. And so the idea here is, imagine that there is a crisis between the United States and the Soviet Union over Berlin in the period from '58 to '62. We don't have to imagine that this happened. And the concern was that if--imagine if the Soviets rolled troops into West Berlin and they altered the political and military reality on the ground. What would the United States do then? Well it doesn't have enough conventional troops in Europe to block the invasion or stop it. So they have to accept it in the first stage. Then they have to make a decision. Well we said all along that we're going to use nuclear weapons, what happens if now we launch a nuclear weapon on Moscow to get them to alter their behavior in West Berlin. Well but then that carries with it the risk that the Soviet launches a nuclear weapon against the United States. And so if we back-end this, going back to the initial step over whether or not to alter the military reality in Berlin, that decision by the Soviets to put troops in West Berlin, move troops from East Berlin to West Berlin, they will be deterred from it because they're not sure how the US will respond and whether both sides can control a nuclear escalation. And so the claim here is that this presence of Mutually Assured Destruction induced real caution on the part of both of the superpowers and made it much less likely that they would want to escalate a military conflict. So "Would you further explain what you guys mean when the period of vulnerability during the stage of nuclear weapons development might heighten the risk of nuclear war?" So I want to do this with an example again. And this is the example of the pressure that is--a historical example of the pressure put on the United States in the summer of 2008 by Israel to launch a preventive strike against Iran. So by this time, there was a concern in Israel that a Democrat was going to win in the fall of 2008. In light of all the backlash to the war against Iraq from 2006 on in the United States. And the concern in Israel was that a Democratic president was going to be much less likely to support a military option to taking out the Iranian nuclear program. So the Israelis felt that they had a window to respond to the growing Iranian nuclear program. It was going to end with the election in the United States. They thought it was more likely that they would get support from president Bush or at least president Bush. If he didn't give the Israelis military support, he would at least, in a sense, say "Go ahead if you guys want to use military force on your own to try and take off the Iranian nuclear program" And so these Israelis believed we have a window to take out the Iranian nuclear program. We don't believe Obama will do it so we're going to go to the US in summer 2008 and we're going to ask for permission to launch a preventive strike against the Israelis. President Bush said no. But this illustrates this tension and the idea here is that the concern in Israel was once Iran gets nuclear weapons, because of deterrence, because of the risk that they will launch those weapons against us, our options-- our military options to prevent either the acquisition of nuclear weapons or the use by the Iranians are much more constrained. So we better do something militarily now before Iran gets the nuclear bomb. And so that's why there is this period of vulnerability during the development of a nuclear weapons program, where there might be incentives to launch a preventive strike to destroy the program before it becomes operational. >> I mean the logic is pretty simple. Before they actually successfully build a nuclear weapon and that could use it as a deterrent and also as a counterattack for many military intervention, that is precisely the time to strike because they won't have this overwhelming --this weapon of sort of overwhelming force to respond to any attack. Right? Before, there is this dividing line between a nuclear power and a non nuclear power and you attack before they become a nuclear power because after they become a nuclear power, it's much more difficult, if not off the table. Think of North Korea as well. Before North Korea got a bomb, that was one thing to think about military strike to prevent them from getting a nuclear weapon. But once they now have one, any sort of strike could very well mean a nuclear response against South Korea, Japan, and if they develop enough long range missiles, even United States. >> Uhm. Two more questions. One is the follow up question to the Israeli example that we were just giving. "Why did the Israelis need to ask the US permission to use military force against Iran in 2008?" On one hand, they weren't legally obligated to do so because of the close alliance relationship for a long time. This is what allies do. They consult each other. A second reason though to consult the United States is a strike-- a preventive strike against Iran carried with it the risk of retaliatory strikes in a larger war in the Middle East. And so Israel under these circumstances wanted to consult with the United States to see what are you going to do if we launch a preventive strike against the Iranians. We take off their nuclear weapons program but then the Iranians launch a larger war against us. Will you honor your alliance commitment? And so that's why there is this consultation in this case. There is another question. "I'm still confused if nuclear weapons are understood as detrimental, if the costs of using them are so high, why are we worried about groups using them?" Great question. And this comes down to different assumptions about whether or not the possessors of nuclear weapons can be deterred. If they care enough about worldly possessions, and political terms, that will prevent them from using the weapons right? Can we impose enough costs on them that they will take second thoughts and not use them in the first place? And so the belief is and the concern is that Iran's leadership is less sensitive to the cost of having millions of Iranians killed in a retaliatory nuclear strike. This assumption about the Iranian leaders being less sensitive raises skepticism on the part of American and Israeli leaders that Iran could be deterred in a nuclear crisis. And as a consequence, the policy prescription is then we have to do more to prevent them from getting nuclear weapons because we're not sure if the deterrence will work with the Iranians as it did to the Soviets. And a little bit more historical context on this. If we look back at memoirs and statements made by Mao Zedong, the leader of China in the 60s and the 70s. He talked openly about China being a very large country that could absorb losses of in the hundreds of millions in a nuclear war. And so when leaders make statements like that, it raises doubts about the effectiveness of deterrence. 