 Now we move on to our next section and this is related to the nature of the terrorist threat is the extent of the terrorist threat. And you have a reading by Mueller and Stewart on this debate that takes a strong position that the terrorist threat against the United States is as not as severe as many politicians or members of the news media make it out to be. But before Pat summarizes that reading, let me provide the core elements of the alternative position that the terrorist threat is quite real and is very severe. The argument that terrorism is a real and serious threat to US national security is based on several assumptions. First, unlike Mueller and Stewart, many commentators argue that the US is quite vulnerable to another major attack. Successful terrorist attacks in places like Spain, a few years ago demonstrate that the continuing capacity of terrorist groups to attack is quite real and that democracies in particular with their more open politics, societies and economies are particularly vulnerable to terrorist attacks. Indeed, terrorizing the population through suicide attacks makes much more sense arguably in a democracy where that same population can then vote for its leadership with those experiences in mind, then in an authoritarian regime. And this is arguably a lesson that was gleaned from the terrorist attack on, attacks on Madrid in Spain during a national election campaign in that country. Secondly, cont, also contrary to Mueller and Stewart, many argued that terrorist groups could get possession and use a nuclear weapon, such a nuclear attack would be a game changer in terms of its effect on Amer, the American polluty and society or any target that a terrorist a group would focus on with a nuclear attack. Third and perhaps most importantly, commentators like the Canadian Academic and Politician, Michael Ignatieff, who's written a lot about this. Argued that those who suggest that terrorism is not a major threat, because relatively few people die from terrorist attacks or that terrorist attacks are rather uncommon and rare over time compared to other threats are missing the point from this perspective. The number of deaths from terrorism is not what makes terrorist's attacks, so damaging and threatening from this perspective. What's truly threatening about terrorist attacks is the psychological effect of terrorism. The fear and intimidation that it creates in the populus, that's what makes it a threat. Consequently, Ignatieff argues that the next attack, even if there's one more in the, you know, over the span of 15 years could very well prompt the American public to demand a national security state or some sort of version of that and the wide spread suspension of civil liberties that would end American democracy as we currently know it. From this perspective, the US could arguably in a sense, lose the war on terrorism not because terrorist organizations defeated, the American military or even unleashed some threshold of unbearable cost in the form of deaths and injuries through attacks on the homeland. Rather the United States could be severely weakened in this confrontation through the transformation of our politics from a liberal democratic order to something more approximating a national security state that basically lacks the fundamentals of democracy, such as individual freedoms and political competition, because of a relatively few terrorist attacks. So. >> So now let's look at the, the other side. In a nutshell, Mueller and Stewart argued that the United States has been engaged in a massive overreaction to the events of 9/11. The real threat to American citizens posed by terrorism is incredibly small. Perhaps less than drowning in your own bathtub or getting struck by lightning. This overreaction stems from a fundamental misreading of the threat posed by Al Qaeda and its affiliates. Rather than treating the destruction of 9/11 as an example of organizational capability on the part of Al Qaeda, they argue that this piece of evidence on its own is fundamentally misleading. Instead there could be another interpretation of this event, namely that Al Qaeda was just incredibly lucky. Rather than attributing the absence of more terrorist attacks to counter-terrorism measures by the United States, they argue that the remnants of Al Qaeda are isolated and incapable of posing a real danger to the United States. If correct, these claims have some important policy implications. They suggest that we should reduce massive amounts of public spending on counter-terrorism measures in the United States. They suggest that the United States should have been out of Afghanistan and Iraq a long time ago. They attribute any lingering threat posed by terrorists as a reaction to these foreign policy choices of the United States. And finally, these claims also imply that the United States should reorient its grand strategy away from the existential threat posed by terrorism. So now let's critically re-examine the logical foundation of the claims in this paper, and the evidence upon which it rests. We often talk about evidence as empirical implications of the arguments or claims made by the authors. So first, in terms of evidence, they rely heavily on those 50 cases of potential domestic terrorist acts since 9/11. On their own, this quantity and its costs were relatively small. Moreover, they suggest that many of the cases were manufactured by law enforcement. From this evidence, they conclude that many domestic terrorists are inept and incapable of inflicting widespread damage on the United States. These terrorists are not careful or well-organized. Instead they choose targets on the basis of convenience rather than on the basis of some set of larger strategic goals that coincide with inflicting maximum damage. Second, the defense of their claims also rests on a logical exercise in which they evaluate the benefits provided by the massive diversion of domestic resources. Some say over $1 trillion to counter terrorist policies, to counter-terrorism at home. They use annual spending levels and an assumption about the costs of a serious terrorist strike to estimate how many terrorist strikes should be prevented to justify these public expenditures. I think they come to the conclusion that the US should be stopping about one terrorist strike a day to justify the expenditures of counter-terrorist policies at home. Notice, too, that this logical exercise complements the discussion about the ineptitude of existing potential terrorists and their limited number. In short, the United States has vastly overestimated the threat posed by terrorism and has mistakenly allocated huge quantities of resources to this phantom threat. Okay, let's examine the defense of these claims more closely and start with the evidence. Again, they appear to have a pretty impressive list of cases. Impressive, that is, because of their limited number. Ask yourself, though, is this a limited sample? Are there cases of potential terrorism, are there cases of potential terrorism that might have been left out of this count, and that if we add them, might that generate an alternative conclusion? Note that they exclude cases of terrorism in war zones, and they exclude many cases of terrorism outside of the United States. This is important. Think about the consequences in ISIS today and the attacks by ISIS. The concern is that ISIS, strengthening as an organization, then develops the capacity, strengthening as an organization through attacks in the Middle East, and this organizational strength then creates the potential that it could strike in the United States. So, what does all this mean? I just jumped myself in my notes. >> So let me go back and talk about ISIS, right? So they would exclude, right, any acts of ISIS, of, any acts of terrorism by ISIS in the Middle East. >> Got a little confused, didn't you? >> I know, I did. >> Right, it's weird still coming back from spring break. But so should these cases of ISIS attacks in the Middle East, should they be incorporated into a discussion about whether the United States has overreacted to ISIS? As I mentioned, the concern right now is that ISIS and its gains in Iraq and Syria is acting like a magnet, drawing in potential terrorists with passports that could allow them to travel freely in the United States and Europe. As I already said. So ask yourself, are the recent gains by ISIS enhancing their ability to launch a terrorist strike against the United States? If your answer to that question is yes, then you can use this example to challenge their conclusions by suggesting that the evidence used to defend their claims is biased. It's missing relevant cases of potential terrorism that pose a significant threat to the United States. Now their evidence also relies on one interpretation of the unknown that's debatable, namely are there a bunch of cases of successful counter-terrorism that haven't been publicized by the government? This possibility along with the absence of another 9/11 is often cited as a defense for American policies to prevent terrorism. They point to a story by a reporter suggesting that she could not uncover any evidence of these secret cases. Okay, what's the problem here? It's very difficult to interpret the unobserved, either one way or the other. They want to interpret the unobserved instances of potential terrorist attacks as the absence of terrorist attacks but the truth is we just don't know what that number is. This makes it very hard to determine the success of the government's counter-terrorism policies. Now their claims also rest on a hypothetical scenario that estimates the number of foiled terrorist plots necessary to justify a large amount of public spending on counter-terrorist measures. When you see these thought, thought exercises, though, question the quality of the underlying assumptions, because they often drive the conclusions. For example, is $500 million a good guess at the real costs of a terrorist strike? Does it really just rely on the direct economic costs like the loss of lives and property hit by the attack? What about the costs of behavioral changes of those people not directly affected by the terrorist strike? For example, imagine terrorists get past airline of safety and blow up another plane. There are likely to be significant spillover costs. Airline stocks will get hammered on Wall Street. Those are real losses. Some people will stop flying. We then need to incorporate those costs on broader, those spillover costs, on broader economic activity. So let me give you an example of these spillover effects, effects from 9/11. The terrorists did something that no navy in this world could ever do. They effectively embargoed the American economy. International trade stopped for days after 9/11. The borders closed. People stopped working. They sat at home and watched TV. The nation stopped. So while thousands of people were killed, the behavior of hundreds of millions of people changed. And that is one of the larger challenges associated with terrorism. These strikes can have significant spill-over effects, because they alter the basic psyche of those not directly impacted. Thus, when you're reading articles such as this, ask yourself, do these costs need to be incorporated in these, in this exercise of hypotheticals? Now to clu, concl. >> Conclude. >> To conclude I just want to emphasize a few takeaway points when it comes to assessing what you are reading. You first have to identify the central claims, or arguments, in a piece, so identify, I'll talk, identify the one liner. Then ask yourself, how is that argument constructed? What are its logical foundations, and what is the evidence offered in support of those claims? Then we want you to start thinking critically about those components. In this exercise I ask whether the pool of 50 cases of potential terrorism is broad enough. And then I ask whether the underlying assumptions of the cost assessment scenario were valid or plausible. Finally, even though I just provided some examples by which you might take apart an argument, I don't want you to dismiss their arguments completely out of hand. We need to have these debates. At the heart of this matter is a question they really don't assess. Namely, how much of the absence of another 9/11 attack can be attributed to government policy. They give some interesting evidence of terrorist futility, but they might need to spend some more time assessing government policy. 