 Now I want to transition us and talk a little bit about how the attacks on 9/11 shaped America's counter-terrorism strategy. The component, and I want to focus on here, the component that included fighting two wars against states in Afghanistan and in Iraq. So I want to start with Afghanistan and the questions we're asking here is, "How did the attacks on 9/11 lead to a war in Afghanistan?" And then, "How did the attacks on 9/11 lead to a war in Iraq?" So let's the first one. With respect to Afghanistan, in many ways there wasn't a decision to be made by the American government. President Bush instantly felt that the United States was at war as soon as he learned of the attacks. He quickly drew the parallel with Pearl Harbor and made the decision to attack the perpetrators of that attack on 9/11 which was quickly determined to be Al Qaeda. On the night of September 11th with limited consultation with only a few advisors, Bush also made the decision to fight an expanded war against terrorism. This is important. The United States would not discriminate between terrorist organizations and states that harbored terrorist organizations in this conflict. This decision would serve to motivate the decision for war against Afghanistan and force a number of countries like Pakistan to make hard choices about what to do in this rapidly changing world. Pakistan was warned by administration officials right away that there were only two sides in this larger conflict -- Either with the United States or against it. Pakistan opted to support American efforts in Afghanistan as a result. There's an implicit threat there. I also want to point out that President Bush put tremendous pressure on the military, the Defense department, and the CIA to attack Afghanistan quickly in the aftermath of 9/11. He was deeply concerned that the United States could be attacked again before it had a chance to respond with military force in Afghanistan. There was a deep concern in the administration that an inability to prevent another attack -- and they were concerned about this because they didn't know where the attacks were coming from at this point and the scope of Al Qaeda's network. And so there's a deep concern that they were already unable to prevent another attack and then if that was coupled with a a delayed response against the Taliban, that this inaction could provoke a deeper crisis of confidence in the United States. And in this crisis scenario, public confidence in the American government would collapse because it had failed to provide security from external threats which is perhaps the most critical function of a government. Thus, the administration worried that a delayed response to the Taliban could lead to real disorder here at home. Overall, the war in Afghanistan sought to topple the Taliban, install a government more friendly to American interests, and most importantly deny Al Qaeda a staging ground for future attacks against the United States. The terrain and political structure of Afghanistan has and -- has proven to be a formidable obstacle, though, to these goals. Remember, the British and the Soviet empires had long struggled to retain a sphere of influence in Afghanistan for the same sets of reasons. In many ways, the Soviet war in Afghanistan hastened its own collapse. The United States was worried about this possibility in the fall of 2001 and so these concerns about getting bogged down in an ultimately losing conflict in Afghanistan shaped the initial American strategy. Given the pressure to go to war quickly, the Bush administration sought to fight by standing up the local resistance which was the Northern Alliance. They're going to give the Northern Alliance significant aid against the Taliban which was more heavily established in the southern parts of Afghanistan. Now, does this strategy sound familiar? Think back to Obama's West Point speech and his emphases on relying on local fighters for allies. Within a few weeks after 9/11, the administration was doing just that and had a CIA team on the ground building this relationship with the Northern Alliance and suitcases full of cash. I also think it's important to point out the wide base of support garnered by the United States to fight this war in Afghanistan. NATO, or the North Atlantic Security Organization invoked -- North Atlantic Treaty Organization, invoked Article V asserting that the attack on the United States was an attack on all of its members which then obligated them to contribute to the war against the Taliban. Moreover, Russia and China also supported the United States in Afghanistan, seeing the fight against radical Islamic terrorists as furthering their interests in combating terrorism as well. There's a larger point to be made here though. Terrorism, when effective, challenges the basic social contract in a society, In this contract, a governments commits to providing some form of physical protection for its citizens. Terrorism, by undermining that promise, can threaten the legitimacy of governments. Consequently, terrorist strikes can activate staunch resistance to them by states who can gloss over some pretty serious conflicts of interests otherwise in the face of this common enemy. And think here again about the evolving relationship between Iran and the United States with respect to ISIS. Both Iran and the United States want to undermine its capacity to inflict terrorist attacks and wage war against the Iraqi government. So now let's transition and talk a little bit about Iraq. If 9/11 created a lot of political capital for the United States to wage war against the Taliban, the decision to widen this counter-terror campaign to include toppling Saddam Hussein squandered a lot of this international goodwill, in part because the administration was populated by many neo-conservatives in senior positions that had long supported regime change in Iraq. The calls for going to war against Iraq from within the administration emerged almost simultaneously after the attacks on 9/11. Donald Rumsfeld, the Secretary of Defense, raised the possibility of going to war against Iraq in a meeting on September 12. And Paul Wolfowitz, his deputy, issues a clear threat to states that sponsor terrorism hinting at going to war against Iraq a day later on September 13. In slightly less than two months after 9/11, President Bush had ordered Rumsfeld to begin updating the war plan for Iraq. So these decision are at least momentum for a decision to go to war in Iraq emerges very quickly within the administration after 9/11. In many ways this American decision for war against Iraq in 2003 was overdetermined. And by that I mean that there were so many political justifications given for war, it's hard to pinpoint any single cause. So for example, Wolfowitz famously commented that the administration focused on the threat provided by weapons of mass destruction in Iraq because that was likely to be the most effective rationale to secure domestic support. The broader claim here was that Saddam Hussein has weapons of mass destruction, namely chemical and biological weapons, and he was pursuing a nuclear weapons program. Because he had used chemical weapons against his own people in the past, conventional deterrence strategies wouldn't be effective against him. He was not sensitive to the potential costs of their use. Moreover, he might either give these weapons to terrorists or use these weapons of mass destruction to threaten the United States or its allies in the region. So this risk was used to justify preventive action by the United States. A preventive war to take Saddam Hussein out to insure that in the future he could not threaten anyone with nuclear weapons. Relatedly, we want to emphasize here that the threat of terrorism had really aggravated the threats associated with nuclear weapons because it would also raise the possibility that organizations like Al Qaeda could acquire these weapons of mass destruction from rogue states like Iraq and then use them in the future against the United States. Now second, Iraq had been labeled as part of the Axis of Evil, or rogue states that posed a vital threat to the United States. The administration, particularly the vice president Dick Cheney, also sought to play up Saddam's contacts with Al Qaeda to suggest that he might be willing or had already harbored Al Qaeda in the same way the Taliban had. Third, the administration also seized on Iraq as a critical leverage point to transform the broader Middle East. Many of the president's advisors had come to believe that the threat posed by radical Islam in the Middle East would take generations to alleviate. They also believed that this larger struggle within Islam could be attributed in part to the absence of opportunities for self government and political participation in the Middle East. Consequently, regime change in the Middle East, the movement of autocratic regime or dictatorships to democracies could lessen the appeal to join radical political organizations and then channel these frustrations about political incapacity into normal non-violent democratic channels. The view was once Iraq democratizes, it could then serve as a beacon for democracy in the Middle East and put pressure on other autocratic regimes to do the same. Now finally, administration officials like Dick Cheney also made another argument that in some senses took a fatalistic view about the threat posed by terrorists. And the claim went about like this: terrorism was here to stay. It would be impossible to eliminate all of the potential terrorists in the world. However, one thing that United States could do was to alter the principle theater in which these strikes occurred. So rather than fighting the terrorists in New York City when you had firemen, policemen and civilians getting killed, instead let's fight the terrorists in Iraq and allow Iraq to, in a sense, serve as a magnet to draw in terrorists to protect our civilian populations. As you know, the war in Iraq did not go nearly as smooth or successfully as originally anticipated by the Bush Administration. Why? What did they miss? First, the war in Iraq created some political collateral damage for the United States with respect to some of its traditional allies like France and Germany. Second, the administration overestimated the ease by which stable, inclusive democratic institutions could be set up in Iraq. Operating from an incorrect assumption that the top political goal of all Iraqis was simply the creation of a functioning democracy, there was insufficient preparation for post-Saddam Iraq. The belief was that the Iraqis were just going to embrace democracy because that's what everyone wanted, but that didn't happen. The basic internal security structure of Iraq quickly collapsed as soldiers left the army and the police went home. The United States didn't have enough troops on the ground to stabilize the country right away which enabled widespread looting and economic collapse. Iraqis, many with advanced technological knowledge to manage key sectors, like the petroleum sector, simply left Iraq because of basic security concerns. Third, American plans for democracy in Iraq activated the commitment problem that we've discussed in prior lectures. Given the ethnic and religious makeup of the country, these institutions carried the potential to create a permanent majority for the Shia. They could then use democratic institutions to seize control of the state and exclude other minority groups from being able to capture some of the benefits from oil revenues and from participating in government. These concerns then helped to drive initial Sunni opposition to the American occupation which helped to foster a new position and strengthen Al Qaeda in Iraq. Now the war also diverts attention and resources from Afghanistan and this becomes one of the standard critiques of Obama that he levels against Bush in the campaign of 2008 and against McCain. Even though the United States had made significant gains in Iraq with the surge in 2006, the United States was still devoting insufficient attention to Afghanistan and this was allowing the Taliban to maintain a foothold there aggravating the possibility that it could continue to harbor terrorist organizations. Now finally, this extended conflict also exhausted much of the domestic political capital that President Bush had secured to meet the challenge of terrorism posed by the attacks on 9/11. We can see the consequences of these choices today both in how Obama used domestic resistance to the Iraq War to motivate his 2008 campaign. These campaign pledges led him to withdraw American troops from Iraq which in turn probably contributed to the instability in Western Iraq now that ISIS is exploiting. 