 Right well we do want to talk a bit about a set of questions from students about something you mentioned earlier, the increased mission of the CIA after 9/11 and some of the tactics that were used - or felt compelled to be used. And one of these is the enhanced interrogation methods and we've got a video question from one of our students Brooke that I think we'll roll right now on that so why don't we roll that video question? >> Hi I'm Brooke and this is my question. Given technology's recent advancements and the mass collection of information, would you still argue that it would be beneficial to the interests of the United States to continue the enhanced interrogation techniques implemented under the Bush administration? >> Well a couple of points. One is that President Obama, when he came into office, said that the CIA was not going to have a detention interrogation program. So that has ended. Also I have said publicly that as long as I am director, the use of enhanced interrogation techniques as were used in the agency's previous program will not be used. That is something I have committed to. And we do I think need to continue to have the discussion debate about the use of these types of methods. And I know a lot of people ask whether or not they work. And then they equate the enhanced interrogation techniques to torture and I want to make sure that people understand that there is a distinction between those activities that the CIA engaged in that were duly authorized and deemed to be lawful which was the enhanced interrogation program. Now we can have a debate about whether or not they ever should have been authorized and whether or not the Department of Justice memos were worth the paper they were written on, that is I think a worthwhile discussion. But by definition given that they were duly authorized by the President and deemed by the Department of Justice and the Office of Legal Council as legal they were by definition not torture. They were aggressive, certainly and they're called enhanced interrogation techniques. I do not believe personally that we need to use such techniques as we try to elicit information from individuals who are detained in order to gain insight into terrorist activities and attacks. Again some people will say we need to use them, I will say that information that was elicited from individuals who were subjected to them - those individuals provided information that was useful in terms of stopping terrorist operations and activities. I am not going to say though that there is a cause and effect. I am not going to say that without the use of those techniques that we never would have gotten that information. It is supposition whether or not we would have gotten it or in fact we could have gotten it earlier or sooner or more truthfully. And it was a lot of information that came out from those individuals who were subjected to waterboarding and other things that was not accurate, not truthful, that was misleading. So I just think the CIA, FBI, Department of Defense and others, who have the responsibility for gaining this type of insight into the terrorist activities really do not need such procedures and techniques and again as long as I'm CIA director, they will not be employed. >> Can I follow up on this? And so we've talked so far about this in terms of effectiveness but there's a second component that we really press our students on is thinking about the ethics and how should we debate about this ethically. Can you give us some sense of how ethics fold into these debates and have folded into these debates - go ahead. >> And not just in torture, but you know, a lot of the things the CIA did - drone strikes and I mean not yet, but the Obama Administration - all of these actions have an ethical component to it but it's hard to know how that gets factored in. >> -- in the debate process. >> Yeah. We are a country of laws. We also are a country of principles or values. We can point to the laws black letter law, you know exactly what is in the statutes and codes. But ones values and principles and ethics are something that can be very personal depending on one's background experiences. And I think it's the obligation of every individual whether or not you're a government department professor or a CIA director, to make sure that what you're doing comports with your values and your ethics and your morality. There are real challenges and I've struggled with this over the years in terms of the things that we do on behalf of national security and whether or not there's a greater good accomplished by the pursuit of some activities that some people might think are not moral, not consistent with our values. Going to war is a big decision. Committing troops which presidents have done over the course of you know, all of our administrations. You know that you're going to be putting lives on the line. We had a discussion yesterday, Bill McRaven, the Chancellor here, was talking about how a young private who may be faced with somebody who has a weapon but they're also family members behind and they know that person is going to shoot. What decision do you make knowing that you could in fact incur collateral deaths of family members and innocents? Same thing is true as far as CIA is concerned. The types of things that we're involved in, that we are directed by law to engage in in covert action and some of the things that are very controversial and I'm not going to speak to anything that CIA particular does but when I was at the White House I talked a lot about the drone program and predators. This is a platform of great capability in terms of intelligence collection but also as a platform that can launch missiles and bombs and take lethal action. People think that there's nobody sort of piloting it. It's a remotely piloted vehicle. There are pilots that are far removed from the platform but it's an instrument of great precision and accuracy - much more so than the typical weapons that are used on the battlefield. And so there can be a very strong moral argument made to be using those types of platforms because you are going to save innocent lives by being more precise in the use of this. But the decision to pull the trigger is a very very important one and I think everybody who has been in that position really thinks long and hard about it. And whether or not you need to pull that trigger in order to save lives and not just because you're not going to hit collateral around you but you know that person in that area is at the stage of being deployed to carry out an attack against innocents, women and children or our diplomats overseas. And the last opportunity you may have to stop that person from carrying out that heinous attack is to remove them from the battlefield. And as the President has said on numerous occasion, it is an action of last resort. And for the U.S in its counterterrorism activities where it takes lethal action there is a requirement for a determination of feasibility of capture. If we or our partners abroad can capture that individual, that's the action that must be taken. It is only if that person can not be captured and if the determination is made that that person or persons pose a serious and imminent danger to U.S persons, that's when the decision is made to take the ultimate action. 