 So your Mayerfeld reading presents an unqualified argument against torture, stating that torture is never acceptable, because it violates the basic human rights of the individual. It should never be legally sanctioned by a state, also, and this is important, it is never morally permissible for the individual. Bottom line, torture is always wrong, and never justified either as a legal, or moral option. Mayerfeld bases his unwavering stand against torture on several intersecting assumptions. First, he argues that the ticking time bomb scenario, which seeks to justify limited use of torture on utilitarian grounds, that it could provide useful information, that could save thousands of innocent victims, is unrealistic and never occurs in real life. Because the ticking time bomb scenario is a fantasy, there is no basis for an exception to the legal and moral prohibition of torture. Second, Mayerfeld states that in order to use torture in the ticking time bomb scenario, you must be certain of the tortured person's guilt, and that is not possible in the circumstances of capture and coercion. Because we cannot be certain of guilt, torture will often lead to innocent victims being tortured. Third, next we need to be certain that they have information on the attack, and that they would provide good, reliable information in response to the pain of torture. Mayerfeld argues that, in truth, torture brings about the opposite result. The pain inflicted by the torture pushes the victim to say whatever needs to be said to make the pain stop. The result is that torture produces bad, and misleading information that does not help with interrogations, and investigations. He argues that there is no solid evidence that torture ever works, and the examples provided by others are questionable and, quote, "cherry-picked cases." Fourth, torture cannot be restricted to the ticking time bomb scenario. Torture is a slippery slope and can become an institution in which perpetrators of torture see ticking time bombs everywhere, even when they do not exist. Entertaining an exception for torture under unusual circumstances that never exist in the world, opens up the door for an expansive use of torture more broadly. Fifth, Mayerfeld argues that torture is counterproductive and creates harms of its own that undermine counter-terrorism policies more generally. He states that torture alienates target populations that are often subject to torture, and makes them mistrust and hate the United States. This undermines any attempt to win over Muslim populations to America's perspective, for example, and drives them into the arms of the radical organizations that the United States is battling against. Torture also corrupts the torturers, those who perform the violent acts and forever affects and damages them, harming our intelligence and military forces, who we rely on, to protect us. >> Okay, your reading by well-known conservative commentator Charles Krauthammer, takes the opposite position as Mayerfeld. Krauthammer argues that the use of torture should be allowed under certain circumstances, and is not only morally acceptable, and this is a crucial point here, but it morally required if it can save lives of innocent victims of a terrorist attack. So how does he come to such an extremely opposite view of torture, than we just saw laid out from Mayerfeld? The first point to note on Krauthammer's argument is that he makes key distinctions regarding the moral status of soldiers, terrorists, and terrorists with information. He argues that, in war, soldiers are legitimate combatants that follow rules, and thus should not be subject to torture, even if captured. However, terrorists are not following any moral rules of conflict, and thus should not be given similar protections against torture if they are captured. Most importantly, terrorists with information about an attack, may be even more morally susceptible to the use of torture, according to Krauthammer, because unlike a terrorist without information about an imminent attack, torture may provide information that would prevent an attack thus saving lives of many innocent victims and then producing a greater good, and so from a utilitarian perspective, you have these gradations. Soldiers are, sort of, off limits because of their moral status, as legitimate combatants, and then you have this category of terrorists who are all, sort of, morally susceptible to torture because of the position they put themselves in, and within that category, terrorists with information are the one classification in which torture is, arguably, most applicable because it could create the greater good of avoiding harm for countless-- or, a large number of potential victims. So for Krauthammer, one reason torture should be tolerated under certain circumstances is that the target, terrorists, are morally liable, they are responsible, according to Krauthammer, for harsh treatment. They bring it on themselves, from this perspective, because of the actions that they decide to be involved in, namely terrorism that targets civilians, and then thus, don't follow the rules of war, if you will. Now secondly, unlike Mayerfeld, who argues that the ticking time bomb scenario is unrealistic and never happens in real life, Krauthammer argues the exact opposite. The idea that terrorists have actionable information on attacks that may be acquired by applying torture, is feasible, according to him, thus the use of torture could lead to the thwarting of a terrorist attack, and avoiding the death of large numbers of people. A few further points are required here, because it's such a drastic change from the Mayerfeld perspective. Unlike Mayerfeld, Krauthammer does not think one needs a high level of certainty, that the terrorist is guilty of involvement, or has usable information. His bar is much lower. His threshold for applying such tactics is not certainty, right. He offers examples, primarily from Israel's counter-terrorism experience that he claims, demonstrates the validity of the ticking time bomb scenario. And lastly, he concludes that since these circumstances are realistic, states facing the threat of terrorism have a moral duty to use torture when necessary, to save innocent lives and the reason for that is because of the utilitarian context in calculation, really, and that's -- you cause harm to one individual, to avoid harm of many more individuals. And so to recap, in this debate over the use of torture, we represented two competing and contradictory positions on the use of terror-- on torture, sorry. Mayerfeld makes the case that torture is always morally wrong, and thus, there needs to be a legal and moral bans on the use of torture. Krauthammer, on the other hand, argues that there are certain circumstances when torture is morally acceptable, and so there should be legal provisions for its use under those circumstances. No one is arguing for some sort of rampant use of torture here, but there's just this discrepancy between certain exceptions, for Krauthammer, the ticking time bomb scenario, he also lays out a slow fuse scenario that was in your reading and in your module, and Mayerfeld, who wants to avoid any exceptions, partly because he thinks that if you allow any exceptions you're going to have this slippery slope that will be a very expansive use of torture. 