 This module continues our overview of the history of U.S. foreign policy. It will include 4 segments and examine the period from 1840 until 1917. You might think about these segments as providing the background for America's emergence as a global power. Remember, in 1840, the United States had yet to expand to the Pacific Ocean. Texas has yet to be incorporated, a war is about to be fought with Mexico, and the United States still possesses multiple outstanding territorial disputes with Great Britain, the most prominent of which is that over the Oregon Territory. By the end of this period, though, the United States will become the world's strongest power, able to tilt the balance of power in Europe and determine which side would win World War I. We're going to examine 4 of the most prominent developments over this period in this module. The first identifies some of the sources of continental expansion in the 1840's. During this period, often associated with Manifest Destiny, the United States incorporates present-day California, Nevada, Utah, Texas, Arizona, and New Mexico, and settles the dispute over the territory that includes the states of Washington and Oregon. The second segment discusses briefly the foreign policies of the North and South during the Civil War, and casts the Civil War as an international event, because the possibility of British intervention shapes the policies of both the Union and the Confederacy. Obviously, this was a defining moment in American history. The victory of the North would help consolidate the central government of the United States. This centralization of political authority was the necessary component of American power that would make it possible ultimately to project influence outside of North America at the end of the 19th century. And this narrative, with the consolidation of power at home was necessary before the United States could really project power abroad is a critical component of our third segment. It examines America's emergence as a global power in the 1890's. This period is often pointed to as a key break in the history of the United States, when it moves from being a regional power with interest focused mainly on North America, to being a global power with interests in the Caribbean, South America, East Asia and Europe. This transition is really cemented with America's military victory over Spain in 1898, when it acquires significant territory in the Americas and in Asia. This discussion on the 1890's is centered on two key sources of this change in U.S. foreign policy - the consolidation of the federal government after the Civil War, and something called the Open Door. The fourth segment provides a brief overview of the causes of World War I in 1914, and discusses why the United States joins the war in 1917. 