 Let's move on to our continuing history of US foreign policy looking at expansionism in the 1840s. You've got a map here in this first slide that shows how the United States enlarges territory by a remarkable degree in the 1840s. In in that period after the Louisiana Purchase before the Civil War. The United States accomplished this through a combination of war with Mexico in particular, and negotiation. In 1845, we annexed Texas after its brief stint as an independent state. >> There you go. This was followed by war from 1846 to 1848 with Mexico that added California. Not as good an addition, but we'll take it. >> And much of present day southwest Arizona, New Mexico, those sorts of things. The Oregon territory was added after the United States settled a border dispute over the Northwest Territory that is now Oregon and Washington through negotiation and a treaty. The impact of this expansion was vitally important for the future capacity of the United States to project power abroad and ultimately, to project power, all around the world. Extending its territory to the whole continent of North America, from the east coast to the west coast provided the United States with several key resources. And we've got those listed here. First it added land, and land was important for foreign policy because it was a source of wealth and a place that a growing population could settle. Right? We could expand territorially and people could move out West. Right? And that was important for the United States. Secondly, the new territories added natural resources, which provided economic pros, prosperity, but also was important when mobilizing for war later in America's history. And thirdly the new territories served as a basis for dynamic economic growth, which provided a solid economic foundation for the United States as a global power. So three important consequences, three important effects of this expansion for the United States as it started to emerge as a world power. Now, what forces promoted this American expansion? Why did it start to expand in the 1840s as it did? The, I would say, there are four main causes of this. Number one, population and economic growth. In just this this was a benefit or an effect of American expansion. It was also a spur to this expansion. Expansion was needed arguably to due to pressure from a rapidly growing population. This growing population needed new land simply to have room to grow. To have places for these new people and new immigrants and also natural population increases to live. Also, new lands provided economic opportunity usually centered around these natural resources found in Western land. This, these economic opportunities provided prosperity and prosperity was important, as I already said for mobilization for war and the like. But it was also important to keep social peace within the increasingly large and diverse American society. So that's one of the forces. Population growth and economic opportunities. That was important in spurring this need for expansion. Secondly, technology. Techno, technological innovations provided an impetus for expansion. New technologies, in particular the railroad. Were vital for the integration of these new territories into the American state. These technologies provided the mechanisms for successful expansion. Without these technologies, expansion would have been more difficult and thus, would have been at the very least slower. thirdly, ideology. Western expansion had an ideological foundation, as well as a technological one and a political one. Manifest destiny was an idea that provided the ideological under pinning for the social and political drive to populate new newly acquired Western lands. Now I provide a quote on the slide here, that captures these idea of a the divine right of the United States and it's citizens to occupy these Western lands. I'm not gonna read it to you. You, you guys should look at it for yourself. As this quote shows, the expansion for material reasons was also undergirded by a philosophical argument that wetted the expansion to nothing less than the will of God for the United States to be this continental power. And so manifest destiny and the ideas associated with it was an important force that helped to promote this expansion and the fourth and final reason for this expansion was the domestic policies of the day. Namely the issue of slavery. These issues, in particular slavery, slavery was in, intricately interconnected with the drive for Western expansion. From the perspective of, perspective of Southern states, Western expansion was wedded to the need to spread their so called peculiar institution, that is slavery to new states. So that slavery would remain politically viable. This quickly became a game or a contest over numbers, numbers of senators in the US Senate in which the Southern states wanting new slave states in the West, vied with Northern states wanting new free states. In the battle, in these regional interests, North versus South, for control of the US Senate, because control of the US Senate was expected to determine the fate of slavery as a lasting institution within the United States. 