 The Civil War era was a vital time for the country domestically, of course, but it was also an extremely important moment in international affairs for both the United States and for the rest of the world. First, I would argue the most important thing to note about the Civil War was, that it was an important global event, because the fate of the American experiment in democracy hung in the balance in the Civil War. The world was watching arguably and the Civil War was a crucial test of the survival. Not only of the United States as a country, but also of the United States as an idea. In the middle of the 19th century, the United States was one of a very small and exclusive club of democratic countries in the world. Hereditary monarchies and empires were still the most common form of government in Europe and elsewhere, Great Britain had only begun to introduce limited democratic reforms in 1832. So democracy was seen by many as unstable and chaotic. It was seen as a threat to long term security and stability, because those in power saw this stability as better achieved by centralized states without with limited or even absent popular participation. There were though, large groups, usually within society that were pushing for more democracy. There were widespread democratic rebellions in 1848 throughout Europe, in France, in the emerging German states, in the Hapsburg Empire in central and eastern Europe. To name just a few of these places that were touched by these democratic rebellions that were called The Spring of Nations. In a very short time, however these rebellions were largely beaten back by authoritarian regimes, empires and reactionary forces. These democratic rebellions in Europe showcased how liberalism. That is the emphasis on individual rights and freedoms was wedded with nationalism. The idea that groups of people with a common identity based around language or ethnicity, or race or religion or even history should have political independence. In arguably, a territorial state that enabled these groups or nations to govern themselves as they saw fit. This idea, this nationalist idea, of course resonated with the American South. Which argued that their demand for cessation was not just about slavery, but was about states' rights, and the ability of that region to govern itself and construct a society that matched it's particular values, economic needs, and social conventions. So in light of all this, these global trends regarding the tentative spread of democratic values, but also the doubts surrounding the long term viability of democratic governments. The American Civil War had global repercussions. The United States, with its Declaration of Independence and its Constitution establishing popular government as a model. Of both positive and negative consequences of democracy was important. Other countries in Europe and other groups within those countries around the world that had multi-national populations and considered adopting more democratic politics were watching carefully to see if the United States could find a workable solution to its regional divisions. Now the outcome of the Civil War was highly dependent on international forces as well, particularly the actions of European powers. And so that's the second big point about the international aspect of the Civil War. If the strongest European powers, most notably Great Britain and France, intervened on the side of the Confederacy, it could sway the outcome. Just as French intervention in the American Revolutionary War helped the American colonies gain independence from Great Britain. If, though, on the other hand, the great European powers remained neutral and stayed out of the conflict, as they eventually did, the Union, the North, stood a much greater chance of winning the war and keeping the united, the American state, the United States intact. Because it was the stronger of the two warring sides. It had more population, more industry, etc. Now, what did the European powers do? Great Britain declared its neutrality in the civil war about a month after the conflict began. However in reality, this declaration of neutrality benefited the Confederacy, the South, because it conferred what was called, belligerent status, on that region, on the South. Which was seen by both sides, the North and the South, as a first step to recognition of the South. And the independence of the Confederacy. But, this recognition, this official recognition never came. And both Britain and France remained neutral in the conflict which greatly helped the North eventually prevail. So the first big step by international powers in the Civil War was just to stay out of it. Ironically, there was another big actor and that was Russia in among European powers. And Russia actually was much more supportive of The United States and the Union, the North. that, and this was surprising given the future hostility between the United States and Russia in the 20th century and because it was a very conservative state and one that was authoritarian, right? But Russia and its leaders Czar Nick, Alexander II, Czar Alexander II, strongly supported the Union. Now, this was due, for the most part, because Russia was following its own national interests. It saw a, a united and strong American state as a necessary counterweight to Great Britain. Now what did the Union and the Confederacy do? In terms of its for, their foreign policies. Union diplomacy relied on two primary pillars. First, it relied on its economic ties and industrial base which made it an important trading partner with Europe. It was the stronger and more populous of the two sides and thus a better trading partner, over the long term in particular, in many respects. Second, ideology was on the side of the North. It's anti-slavery position which was best exemplified in Abraham Lincoln's fa, famous Emancipation Proclamation that ended slavery in the United States was a key foreign policy decision as well. This move, that had of course very important domestic implications, also made it virtually impossible for European states to side with the Confederacy, because that meant siding in support of slavery. And slavery, although it had been present in Europe and around the world, had been abolished in Europe, in Russia even, and in most of the rest of the world by 1863 and the Emancipation Proclamation. Now what about Confederate diplomacy? Confederate diplomacy relied mostly on an economic base, and what was called the King Cotton Strategy. What the South really had in its favor was the reliance of the world market on its single cash crop of cotton. And cotton fueled the textile mills that was the basis for the industrial revolution in the 19th century. And most of the cotton that the world consumed to make the clothes in these textile mills, principally in Europe, came from the American South. Up to 80%, 90% of the cotton that was used in, in England and, and, in Great Britain and in France, came from the American South. So the South, simply assumed that eventually, that Europe would have to come around, they needed their cotton. They would have to acknowledge the independence of the South. Ultimately though, this strategy failed. Primarily because it would take too long of a period of time for the effect, the economic effect of an absence of American cotton from the American South to have an impact on the economies in Europe. And there were some particular developments that, that he, helped the North and, and hurt the South in this. There was a large surplus of cotton in storage in Europe right at the start of, of the Civil War that helped Europe kinda weather the drop in the cotton trade from the American South. 