 We're going to move to the 1890s, but we're not going to leave the Civil War behind because what we're going to see is the Civil War cast a long legacy on American foreign policy. So the big question that I want you to think about for this a section of the lecture is why does the United States move from being a continental power to a global power in the 1890s? We're going to give you two sets of answers for this, one is a story about the legacy of the Civil War and the second one returns us to the conversation that we had last Thursday about economic interests and how industrialization and the Great Depression from 1873 to 1896 really pushes the United States outward to support territorial annexation in the 1890s. So I want to start this section with a map. Can we go to the map on the next slide that you've already seen again. And we see how America territorial expansion has progressed in the 19th century. You can see the changes in the 1840s that Rob just discussed. Notice though the big gap that occurs after the Civil War until 1898. So the territorial changes that occur in 1898 were given a shot in the arm so to speak by war with Spain. They were undertaken because--and I'm going to take a step back. We have the war with Spain in 1898 because Spain was in the process of suppressing a domestic revolt to its colonial authority in Cuba and because the United States possessed significant economic interests there, particularly with respect to sugar, so the United States launches a successful military campaign that included engaging Spanish forces and land--at land and at sea in both Cuba and then the American Navy attacks the Spanish Navy in the Philippines. This was a dramatic quick victory over the span of a few months that yielded the United States significant territorial acquisitions in Cuba and the Philippines. It then annexed additional territory in Hawaii, Puerto Rico and a number of Pacific Islands. So we have a key break in American foreign policy that facilitated even more movement outward in the Caribbean and Latin America after the turn of the 20th century, and you can see that in the slides as well. So these episodic changes in American foreign policy in a sense consolidation after the Civil War in 1865, a satisfaction with the territorial borders that exist in 1865 and then we have this rapid movement outward in 1898. So why? Why does the United States simply decide that possessing a hold on North America is no longer enough? Why does the United States assert itself in the Pacific, in Asia and particularly in China and the Philippines. And why does the United States begin to challenge traditional European interests in South America which included confronting the British with a brief threat of war over Venezuela in 1895 and 1896. I want to briefly overview two answers to this question to help us understand really the origins of America's rise to great power status in international politics. The first draws on the work are Fareed Zakaria, who's now an important foreign policy pundit that writes for such news outlets as such the Washington Post and he has a regular show called GPS on CNN. Zakaria's first book built off his dissertation and was motivated by the following puzzle. Given that the United States--or I should say, given that the American economy was quickly becoming one of the large--world's largest after the Civil War and the rest of Europe was engaging in a global competition to secure colonies in Asia and Africa, why was the United States so slow to expand its political reach outside of North America. Zakaria argues that this hesitation from much of the latter part of the 19th century rested on the institutional consequences of the Civil War. The north had successfully waged a long war with the south and then the victors set about on a temporary program of reconstruction to expand federal authority relative to the states. At this point in American history, Congress asserted control over foreign policy and limited new federal expenditures so that Civil War depts could be repaid. This fiscal restraint applied particularly to executive plans for territorial expansion, like that proposed by President Grant over Santo Domingo. So it's not that the executive branch didn't want to expand in the late 1860s and the 1870s, instead Congress provided an effective break on these ambitions consistently until the 1890s. So this regular fiction between Congress and the President with respect to foreign policy was a feature as I said of these foreign policy debates until it really eroded in the 1890s with the end of divided government. Remember concept of divided government, this is when the parties control multiple branches of government. We have unified government when the same party holds the presidency and both Houses of Congress. ^M00:40:01 So, in the 1890s, we get the end of divided government as the Republicans would come to control both houses of congress and the presidency. And then we start to get the shift, domestic institutional changes that facilitate outward expansion. Another important thing to point out here is that the executive branch did not oversee a large bureaucracy capable of implementing a more expansive foreign policy. The federal state was just simply small and the union opted to pull back from widespread military mobilization after 1865. Economic growth and industrialization began to change the size of the state in the decades after civil war as business enterprises became continental or became national in scope. They spanned across state boundaries and as a consequence, there's--there began to be greater demand from business on the state from more effective national regulation of business practices. And so, these two contributed to the development of a larger federal bureaucracy that can--could then stand behind a more robust foreign policy. These changes on a broad level were facilitated by economic growth which also helped to solve the fiscal problem or I should say the fiscal choice that the US was making post 1865 which has simply cut federal spending and don't spend anymore money on new territorial expansion. And so, economic growth helps to fill government coffers towards the 1880s and the 1890s and then all of a sudden the US can start thinking about territorial expansion again. So, that's one explanation for why the US begins to expand outward in the 1890s and it's a story--remember big questions from the very first day of class, how do domestic institutions shape American foreign policy, this is an example of that argument. Zakaria is talking about the institutional consequences of the Civil War and they then constrained American foreign policy for over 30 years afterwards. So, let's go to the second explanation for why it is that the United States expands outward in the 1890s. And once again, here, we're going to pick up on one of the themes that we were talking about last Thursday and draw on something called the Wisconsin School of Diplomatic History. And their answer to this question moves from domestic institutions to societal interests. A key source in this tradition in the citation is up there is Walter LaFeber's book in the 1890s that's cited on this slide. I want to discuss his argument briefly. We talked about it a little bit last week and this is a story about how big business captures American government and then pushes the government to expand outward. So LaFeber focuses how--focuses on how industrialization and economic change pushed the United States to act like other colonial powers based in Europe. So there's an extended economic downturn in the American economy that I've already talked about, really from about 1873 through 1896 which created a broader economic crisis. This period was marked by something called deflation which you can just think of as falling prices. Deflation is really bad for economic growth for the following reason. So, imagine that you are Rob Moser and you need to buy a new red car to express your political loyalties. What are you going to do if you expect the price of that car to fall at some point in the future? If you expect prices to go down, you wait to buy the car to save money. Now, imagine that those calculations apply to every consumer in the economy. An expectation of falling prices lead consumers to stay out of the market but when that happens, businesses don't sell anything and they lose lots of money or they simply fail. So, deflation can undermine economic growth and this is why if you've heard the Federal Reserve talked in public speeches, they're really concerned about deflation. Same thing in Europe, deflation hurts economic growth. So this general situation of deflation occurred in the final quarter of the 19th century. While it is now attributed to monetary policies associated with the gold standard, business leaders at the time diagnosed it as a problem of overproduction. Capitalism more generally had become too efficient and they lobbied for a broad mix of policies that were then pursued by the Republican Party to facilitate economic recovery. These policies included an important foreign component. The United States needed to be more aggressive in acquiring new foreign markets through territorial expansion if necessary because European powers were already doing this around the globe. The United States also needed to build a big new Navy capable of extending American military protection to these new territories. And the United States should raise tariffs to generate the revenues necessary to pay for naval expansion and to raise domestic prices by keeping foreign products out of the American market. So, in LaFeber's eyes, business pushed the American government to respond to the extended economic downturn by appealing to nationalist causes that would both expand the American market while keeping it insulated from European competition behind tariff walls. This was politically easier than economic reforms at home that would first depress economic activity before making things better. New spending on the military, the navy would also provide another benefit acting as a government stimulant to economic growth and jobs at home. >> All right. So, in summary, what Pat's provided here two sets of answer to the question that has motivated this section right? What led to the emergence of the United States as a great power at the end of the 19th century and why did it take so long basically? The second story just outlined reflects our discussion from last week that highlighted how economic interest can propel the government into certain foreign policy positions. In this case, those supporting territorial expansion in Asia, the Caribbean and Latin America in the 1890s. So the first answer focused on the role of domestic institutions in shaping US foreign policy and the decisions that reflected global expansion in the 1890s. Fareed Zakaria argues that there was a long pause in American foreign policy after the civil war because domestic politics still produced an isolationist foreign policy. The federal government was weak relative to the states possess limited fiscal resources by choice and was limited from undertaking a bolder foreign policy because of divided government and congressional desire to control foreign policy. So, it was a legacy of the civil war really. The other story being that economic interest and the LaFeber school drove eventual expansion in the late 19th century because this economic interest controlled the state. One thing to note here is how there's a connection between this expansion in the late 19th century and the Monroe Doctrine in the early 19th century in the 1820s. Remember, both the Monroe Doctrine which was sort of a premature voice articulation of American descendants in the whole hemisphere and the Roosevelt Corollary where Theodore Roosevelt at the turn of the century would sort of add caveat to the Monroe Doctrine allowing the United States to intervene in Latin American countries. These were connected to arguably this new expansionism in the eight--late 19th century. 