 The world that we have now was really made over the period from 1914 to 1919. It marked a clear break in the historical progression of humankind. New innovations in political and military organization unleashed an incredible scale of killing. Approximately 10 million soldiers--soldiers died and another 7 million civilians died in this conflict but moreover this conflict then set the stage for even more appalling casualty for years in World War II. I was looking this up last night and all of a sudden numbers close to 60 million. The war also activated incredible social and political changes. The empires of Russia, Germany, Austria-Hungary and the Ottomans collapsed. The modern Middle East was constructed by European powers in the midst of World War I. Powerful transnational social movements proved capable of provoking imperial collapse and revolution. And for our purposes, this war left the United States standing as the most powerful country in economic, political and military terms in the world. In this brief section of World War I, we want to overview America's role in this global transformation through war. This section is designed to answer two questions. Why did the US join the war in 1917 and how did the US shape the military and political outcomes associated with World War I? So let's take a step back and talk about the outbreak of war in 1914. World War I is a complex event that on one level defies explanation, don't get me wrong, it's not like people haven't tried. I have and I'm still intrigued by this conflict as an example of incredible social transformation. I still think we have lots to figure out. It remains the most studied war in the history of humankind and it still generates new interests, so publishers right now are falling over themselves to rush new bout--new books out on--that marked the 100th year anniversary of its origins, 1914 to 2014. So what was this thing and why is it so significant? The spark that ignited this war occurred when a young Bosnian Serb by the name of Gavrilo Princip assassinated the Archduke or what we might think of as the vice president of the Austro-Hungarian empire in June of 1914. The Archduke was named Franz Ferdinand. Hopefully you cut the reference to Franz to Ferdinand in the preclude--pre-class music this morning. This assassination pushed Austria-Hungary to declare war on Serbia for a number of reasons, largely centered around how the Serbian nationalist movement of which Princip was a part threatened the Austro-Hungarian empire with dissolution. If Serbia sought to incorporate Serbs in Bosnia then Romanians in Hungary might try to do the same. Austria-Hungary went to war to try quash these nationalist movements from severing their empire. This local Balkan conflict then quickly sparked a world war because of a complicated network of interlocking alliances. Russia anticipated that Germany would fight on the side of its ally, Austria-Hungary. Consequently, it began to mobilize its army, namely call-up reserve troops and then move them to borders with both countries during the July crisis. Germany responded by declaring war on Russia and its ally France. Germany's military plan to defeat both France and Russia rested on a quick and decisive military defeat of France by capturing Paris. This military gamble though led the German military attack--German military to attack France through Belgium. The occupation of Belgium then brought Great Britain into the war on the side of France, Russia, Belgium and Serbia. So, over the course of the few weeks in the summer of 1914, Europe found itself at war. The United States sat on the side lines in 1914 and until 1917 to protect its neutrality and its right to engage and trade with all of the participants. So when war broke out, the American public and its leaders didn't believe that the US had a direct stake in the conflict. In keeping with the tradition of isolationism, the US sought to remain aloof from the European war. Woodrow Wilson initially sought to stake a claim to a mediating role, not a direct military intervention, to a mediating role and was careful not to cast either side or its interests in moral and--sorry, in morally superior terms. So he initially wants to set himself up as a judge that will come to the rescue so to speak to try to force both parties to the bargaining table to reach some type of peaceful settlement. America's intervention though in 1917 on the side of Great Britain and France changed the course of the war. All of the participants were running short on funds to continue the war effort. The US had stepped up its loans to Great Britain and France significantly in 1917 after it joins the conflict. Moreover, the large scale entrance of American troops into Western Europe in 1918 shifted the balance of military power between the two sides. Quite simply, the Germans were running out of money by then. The resources to continue the war on the home front were dwindling and Germany now faced a new power with seemingly inexhaustible resources that still existed because the US hadn't faced four years of war. So the Germans then initiate a failed gamble of a new military offensive on the western front in the spring and the summer of 1918. The German military believed that this was their only chance to try and achieve a victory which was to knock Europe out of the war before the United States was able to bring the full force of both its economy and its military to bear in 1918. When the German military in the summer of 1918 realized that they were going to be unsuccessful in the military campaign in the western front, they advised the political leaders to pursue peace. Woodrow Wilson then steps in, demands the abdication of the Kaiser as a condition of armistice or an end of military hostilities and he simultaneously demands political reforms towards democracy that fall. The victors then constructed a wide ranging peace settlement, we'll talk more about this next Tuesday, that was imposed on Germany in the summer of 1919. So let's take a step back. That's a quick overview of what happens in terms of the key historical details from 1914 to--when war breakouts in July of 1914 to the halting of military conflict in November of 1918. But this should open up a big question which is why does the United States completely reverse its foreign policy stands on the European war in April of 1917? Before turning to that though, it's important to note that Wilson, as I mentioned, already had long sought to keep the United States out of war. He had campaigned on this foreign policy accomplishment in November of 1916. He had even begun to pressure the British and the French into accepting some type of compromised peace in the fall of 1916 and he had even began the process of cutting off American loans which were absolutely vital to--American loans to both the British and the French which were absolutely vital to their abilities to sustain the conflict against Germany. He gives a famous peace without victory speech in January of 1917 in which he alienates and depressed both Great Britain and France by refusing to take sides in the conflict. So, why the switch? Wilson had little choice but to reverse course and he did so grudgingly in April of 1917 because the Germans forced his hand. The German military opted to implement unrestricted submarine warfare against merchant shipping in the oceans off the coast of Europe in January of 1917. This meant that more American vessels--merchant vessels were going to get sunk and more American citizens were going to die. So, why did the Germans make this horrible strategic calculation? I say horrible because of Wilson's attempts to halt the war after the election in 1916 until January of 1917. So on one level, what follows after 1917 is just an example of historical accident or horrible timing. By the time the German political leadership realized what Wilson was doing in the middle of January, the military had already sent the subs out with their orders to sink everything and it was too late to call them back. On another level, the German military felt like they had no other choice. They understood that the balance of resources was shifting against them as the American economy was continually replenishing both the British and the French armies. Germany felt that the United States would come into the war eventually but they knew it would take months even a year before the United States could put sizable number of troops on the continent. Consequently, they hoped to undermine the British and French supply lines and force them into a peace before the American military could arrive. In sum, the first answer to why the US entered World War I is because the Germans provoked the United States by attacking American shipping. The second answer to this question gets us closer to Wilson's own political ambitions and Wilsonianism. Wilson had a vision for a new world order centered on the League of Nations that we will discuss shortly. Moreover, he also wanted to stamp out imperialism more generally in the world. He knew this would dramatically undermine the power of European countries. He felt that a tough peace settlement would accomplish these goals. He believed that his capacities, his political capacity to shape the peace settlement though would be limited unless the United States had shaped the worst outcome by fighting directly into it. So, the United States enters the war in 1917. Significant quantities of American troops don't arrive until 1918. The Germans launched one last military gasp in 1918, fail and then opt for surrender. How did US entry then shape the military and political consequences of World War I? In military terms, the arrival of American troops, new access to American credit and enhanced access to war material built by the American economy shifts the distribution of military power on the continent and pushes the German military to opt for peace. After this failed spring offensive that I talked about in 1918, the German military views the war as unwinnable. So, American entry helps to determine which side will win the military contest. In political terms, the war and Wilson's world view shaped the composition of the post war political order in three important ways. The defeat of Russia, Germany and Austria-Hungary, and the Ottomans met the end of their multinational empires. In their wake, a series of new independent states emerged. Wilson hastened these political changes by championing self-determination or the right of subjected peoples or nationalities to create their own state or new political unit. Wilson also erected a collective security system called the League of Nations in which its members would pledge to band together and counter through force or economic sanctions any attempt to alter the new political and territorial status quo in Europe. He was trying to construct a new international organization to solve the problem of war. In economic terms, the United States emerged from the war as the strongest economic power of the world. The victors had been borrowing significant amounts of capital from American banks and the American government to win the war. Moreover, they had also sold many of their foreign assets during the course of the war to pay for the war. Industrial and agricultural capacity in the United States had been dramatically scaled up during the war because Europe needed someone to produce these goods. Large components of the European labor force was either dead or still engaged in battle. So, this shift in economic power, both in terms of industrial and agricultural capacity and financial resources, would enable the United States to shape subsequent efforts to alter the Versailles Treaty in the 1920s, a subject we're going to return to next week. So, as a recap, this section on United States and World War I has sought to answer two questions. Why did the United States enter World War I and how did it shape its military, political and economic consequences? I discussed two reasons for American entry. The German decision to attack American merchant shipping left Wilson with little choice. Wilson also sought to use American participation militarily in the conflict to get a seat at the bargaining table, to set the peace settlement on terms that were in line with American values and American interests. On one level, Wilson was right. American participation on multiple dimensions including direct military engagement, loans to the allies that enabled their continued participation and the economic supply of war material and basic consumption goods like food, gave the United States enormous influence over the political order that followed. The United States initially established a global system that reflected its values of democracy, anti-imperialism or the open door, it was also talked about as the open door by Wilson. And the US sought to foster international institutions that could solve this problem of war. We will see though next week how the discontinuity between this American vision and the American expenditure, a political capital to supported, would quickly lead to the downfall of this new order in the 1920s. 